1 
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
OHCHR Assessment of human rights concerns  in the  
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, People’s Republic of China  
 
        
 
 
 
   
 
31 August 2022  
  
2 Contents  
 Page  
 I. Introduction  ......................................................................................................................................  1-3 
 II. Background  ......................................................................................................................................   3-5 
 III. China’s legal and policy framework on countering terrorism and “extremism”  .............................  5-6 
  A. Clarity  and scope  of concepts of “terrorism” and “extremism” ...............................................  6-8 
  B. Methodologies applied to identify suspects and “at risk” persons  ...........................................  8-9 
  C. Scope and nature of responses to alleged “terrorist” or “extremist” conduct  ..........................  9-10 
  D. Breadth of preventive, investigative and coercive powers, and degree  
of oversight  and redress  ...........................................................................................................  10-11 
 IV. Imprisonment and other forms of deprivation of liberty  .................................................................   11 
  A. Referrals to “Vocational Education and Training Centres”  .....................................................  12-18 
  B. Detention through the criminal justice system  .........................................................................  18-21 
 V. Conditions and treatment in “ Vocational Education and Training Centres ” ....................................  21-25 
 VI. Other human rights concerns  ............................................................................................................  25 
  A. Religious , cultural and linguistic  identity and expression  ......................................................  25-30 
  B. Rights to privacy and freedom of movement   ..........................................................................  30-32 
  C. Reproductive rights  .................................................................................................................  32-36 
  D. Employment and labour issues  ................................................................................................  36-40 
 VII. Issues of f amily separation and reprisal s  .........................................................................................  40 
  A. Family separations and enforced disappearances  ....................................................................  40-42 
  B. Intimidations, threats and reprisals  ..........................................................................................  42-43 
 VIII.  Overall assessment and recommendations  .......................................................................................  43-45 
   
  Appendix  
 1 
  I. Introduction  
1. In late 2017, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) 
began receiving increas ing allegations  by various civil society groups  that members of the 
Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim ethnic minority communities1 were missing or had 
disappeared in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of the People’s Republic of China 
(hereafter “XUAR” and “China”). In 2018, the UN Working Group on Enforced or 
Involuntary Disappearances reported a “dramatic” increase in cases from XUAR  “with the 
introduction of “re -education” camps in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region by the 
Government of China” .2 Numerous research and investigative reports published since that 
time by a diverse range of non-governmental organi zations, think -tanks and media outlets  – 
as well as public accounts  by victims  – have alleg ed arbitrary detention on a broad scale in 
so-called “camps”, as well as claims of torture and other ill-treatment, including sexual 
violence,  and forced labour , among others .3  
2. During its review of China ’s periodic report  in August 2018, the UN Committee on 
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed alarm over numerous reports of the 
detention of large numbers of ethnic Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities, under the pretext of countering religious extremism in XUAR .
4 The Government stated  that “vocational 
training centres exist for people who ha d committed “minor offences.”5 In subsequent policy 
papers, the Government has presented such centres as part of its strategies to counter 
terrorism and to prevent  or count er “extremism” in XUAR, while at the same time 
contributing to development, job creation and poverty alleviation in the region.6 
3. In light of the breadth and gravity of the allegations , and the nature of information 
received, OHCHR has sought access to XUAR to verify claims since 2018.7 In parallel, and 
further to its global mandate under General Assembly resolution 48/141 and within existing resources, OHCHR  has continued to  monitor th e situation and assess the allegations, 
including by review ing and critically analysing publicly available official documentation, as 
well as research  material , satellite imagery and other open -source information, examining 
their origin, credibility, weigh t and reliability in line with standard OHCHR methodology.  
Throughout OHCHR’s review, particular attention was given to official Government 
documentation and information, including laws, policies, statistical data, court decisions, and official statements and White Papers  made public by the Government , as well as a number 
of other documents that are in the public domain and which OHCHR has assessed as highly 
  
 1 In addition to Uyghurs, this refers to ethnic Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, Uzbeks and Huis. Further in this report 
the term “Uyghurs and other predominantly Muslim minorities” will be used as a shorthand. The 
Office is mindful, however, that there are non -Muslim members of these communities and that people 
from other groups may have also been affected by some of the policies discussed in this report.  
 2 See Communications, cases examined, observations and other activities conducted by the Working 
Group on Enforced or I nvoluntary Disappearances, 115th session. Annex I, General Allegations, 
A/HRC/WGEID/115/1, 16 August 2018; Annual report to the Human Rights Council of the Working 
Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, 30 July 2018, A/HRC/39/46, para. 88 and an nex 
I. 
 3 For a list of articles and media pieces on the situation in XUAR, see “Bibliography of Select News Reports & Academic Works”, compiled by M . Fiskesjö, available at: Bibliography - Uyghur Human 
Rights Project (uhrp.org) ; public victim accounts are available on the Xinjiang Victims Database: 
www.shahit.biz.  
 
4 Concluding Observations on the combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic reports of China 
(including Hong Kong, China and Macao, China), CERD/C/CHN/CO/14- 17, para, 40(a), 19 
September  2018.  
 5 Ibid. 
 6 White Paper on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang”  (original document in English). The 
State Council, 17 A ugust 2019.  
 7 OHCHR, Opening statement and global update of human rights concerns by then UN High  
Commissioner for Human Rights , Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein at 38th session of the UN Human Rights 
Council (18 June 2018).  2 likely to be authentic  based on strong indicia of official character .8 OHCHR has also closely 
studi ed information presented by the Government, including  in the context of its reviews 
before the UN human rights treaty bodies and in response to UN Special Procedures 
communications ,9 and examined material submitted to it by academic and other institutions 
inside China.10 
4. As part of an ongoing process of dialogue, on 17 March 2021, OHCHR formally 
submitted to the Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations in Geneva a request for specific sets of information, detailing various areas of particular interest, including official 
data,  based on its review of the material up to that stage, but did not receive formal response. 
On 19 July 2021, OHCHR further proposed a meeting with relevant Government officials to 
discuss the applicable legal framework as it pertains to counter -terrorism  and the prevention 
and countering of “extremism” in XUAR .
11  
5. By way of supplement to the extensive body of documentation, OHCHR also 
conducted, in accordance with its standard practice and methodology,  40 in-depth interviews 
with individuals with direct and first -hand knowledge of the situation in XUAR ( 24 women 
and 16 men; 2 3 Uyghur, 16 ethnic  Kazakh, 1 ethnic Kyrgyz) . Twenty -six of the interviewees 
stated they had been either detained or  had worked in various facilities across XUAR since 
2016.  In each case, OHCHR assessed the reliability and credibility of these  persons, the 
veracity of the information conveyed, and its coherence with information  obtained from other 
sources .12 Securing interviews posed significant challenges. Most of the interviews were 
conducted remotely for COVID -related and /or security reasons . Further to the “do no harm” 
  
 8 The latter pertains in particular to a  range of documents that form part of the so-called “China 
Cables”, the “Xinjiang Papers”, the “Karakax List”, the “Urumqi Police database” and , most recently, 
the “Xinjiang Police Files”, which in whole or in part have been made public by various media outlets 
and researchers or have been made available to OHCHR. For a number of these documents, OHCHR 
was able to take steps to verify their authenticity, resulting in assessment that they are highly likely to 
be authentic and therefore could be credibly reli ed upon in support of other information. For others, 
such verification was not possible, even if OHCHR has no counter -indication that these documents 
would be inauthentic. OHCHR has not relied on any of these documents as a sole source to make any 
findings . In this assessment, reference to such documents is included where its content comports with 
that from other sources of information.  
 9 See Government’s reply of 16 December 2019 to the Joint Other Letter by a group of Special Procedures of the Human rights Council, JOL CHN 18/2019; C omments on the effect and application 
of the Counter -Terrorism Law of the People’s Republic of China (Counter -Terrorism Law) 
promulgated on 27 December 2015 effective as of 1 January 2016 and its Regional Implementing Meas ures, the 2016 Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region Implementing Measures of the Counter -
Terrorism Law of the People's Republic of China, sent on 1 November 2019; Government reply of 8 
December 2019 to the Joint Urgent Appeal by a group of Special Procedures of the Human Rights 
Council JUA CHN 21/2019, concerning the situation of Mr. Tashpolat Tiyip , 2 October 2019; 
Government reply of 23 November 2020 to the Joint Allegation Letter JAL CHN 14/2020, concerns 
about allegations of use of surveillance to monitor,  track, and ultimately detain persons who belong to 
Muslim minorities in China , 7 July 2020; Government reply of 13 October 2021 to Joint Allegation 
Letter JAL CHN 18/2020, concerns about allegations of forced labour in the context of Vocational Education Training Centres , 12 March 2021 and Government reply of 23 May 2021 to the Joint 
Allegation Letter JAL CHN 21/2020, concerns about allegations of arbitrary detention, ill -treatment 
as well as of gender -based violence against Ms. Gulbakhar Jalilova, 10 Febr uary 2020.  
 
10 This includes a list submitted on 27 July 2021 of thirteen press conferences held by Chinese officials 
on the situation in XUAR, explaining different sets of measures and achievements relating to security, 
development, poverty alleviation, family planning, birth rates, labour and employment, as well as five documentaries providing additional perspectives. OHCHR further received numerous submissions, 
including from research institutes and organizations based in XUAR and attended numerous side 
events organised by the Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China in Geneva.  
 
11 A follow -up note was sent on 3 September 2021, indicating in detail areas for clarification.  
 12 Over one third of the 40 interviewees had either not been interviewed by others, or had been interviewed in the past by researchers, civil society or journalists, but opted not to publicly share their 
experience prior to speaking to OHCHR.
 Where the assessment quotes directly from an account of an 
interviewee, OHCHR has accep ted the statement as assessed and described to be truthful and relevant, 
unless stated otherwise. Direct references to specific statements in the report should not be taken as an 
indication that it was the sole basis of judgment in relation to the issues u nder analysis. These direct 
references and citations were included to provide an example or illustration.  3 
 principle, additional measures were taken in accordance with standard OHCHR practice to 
enhance protection  of persons providing information.   
6. The assessment contained in this document is based on China’s obligations under 
international human rights law, contained principally in the human rights treaties to whic h 
China is a State Party, in particular the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), the Convention on the Elimination of  All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). China has also signed, though not yet ratified, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). As a result, it is obliged as a matter of law to refrain from any acts that would defeat the object 
and purpose of this treaty.
13 Additionally, China is  bound by human rights norms accepted 
as constituting customary international law, notably with respect to the right to life, the prohibition of discrimination based on race, religion or sex, and the right to freedom of 
religion.
14 Moreover, some human rights norms are also considered to constitute jus cogens 
or peremptory norms of international law, accepted and recognized by the international 
community of States as a whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted under any 
circumstances . These incl ude the prohibitions of arbitrary deprivation of life, torture, slavery, 
arbitrary detention, racial discrimination, and  the commission of international crimes 
including crimes against humanity.15 Finally, OHCHR considered standards contained in 
United Nations instruments on counter -terrorism and the prevention and countering of violent 
extremism, as well as the International Labour Organization’s labour rights conventions.16 
7. The assessment was shared with the Government for factual comments,  as per 
standard OHCHR practice.  The Government’s response, further to its request, is annexed to 
this report.  
8. Separately, the Government extended an invitation to the High Commissioner to visit 
China in September 2018. Owing to the COVID- 19 pandemic and the ne ed to discuss the 
parameters of such a visit,  agreement  for the visit was only reached in March 2022 . As part 
of her visit , it was agreed with the Government of China that the High Commissioner would 
also visit XUAR, following deployment of an advance team  to prepare for her visit, which 
took place in April and May 2022.  
 II. Background  
9. XUAR is China’s largest region, covering one -sixth of its total territory, with a 
population of 25.85 million. I t is rich in resources such as coal, gas, oil, lithium, zinc and 
lead, as well as being a major source of agricultural production , such as of cotton. As it shares 
external borders with Afghanistan, India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Pakistan, 
  
 13 Article 18, Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969).  
 14 See, e.g., UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 24: Issues Relating to Reservations 
Made upon Ratification or Accession to the Covenant or the Optional Protocols thereto, or in Relation 
to Declarations under Article 41 of the Covenant (CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.6), para. 8.  
 15 See General Assembly - Report of the International Law C ommission [Seventy-first session (29 
April –7 June and 8 July –9 August 2019)], A/74/10, para. 56, regarding crimes against humanity, 
racial discrimination, slavery and torture; UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 36 –  
Right to Life, CCPR/C/GC/36 (3 September 2019), para. 68, regarding the arbitrary deprivation of 
life; Human Rights Council, Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, A/HRC/22/44 (24 
December 2012), para. 79 regarding arbitrary detention.  
 16 Note, in particular, the UN Glob al Counter -Terrorism Strategy (A/RES/60/288) and the UN Plan of 
Action on the Prevention of Violent Extremism (A/70/674). The framework also includes Security Council resolutions, including S/RES/1373 (2001), S/RES/1566 (2004), S/RES/1624 (2005), 
S/RES/217 8 (2014), and S/RES/2396 (2017); ILO Conventions on Discrimination (Employment and 
Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No.  111) and Employment Policy Convention, 1964 (No.  122). Ratifications 
of ILO Conventions 29 (Forced Labour) and 105 (Abolition of forced labour) are in progress.  4 Russian Federation and Tajikistan, the region also provides important routes and access to 
Central Asian markets and beyond. 
10. Demographically, XUAR has been one of the fastest growing regions in China  and its 
ethnic composition has gradually shifted since 1949.17 In 1953, at the time of the first census, 
over 75 per cent of the total population  in the region  was constituted by Uyghurs, who are 
predominantly Sunni Muslim, with ethnic Han Chinese accounting for seven per cent. Other 
predominantly Muslim ethnic groups living in the region include , in alphabetical sequence, 
Hui, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Mongol, and Tajik p eoples . According to the latest census and the 
Government’s White Paper on “ Xinjiang Population Dynamics and Data”, while the overall 
population of both Han a nd Uyghur ethnic groups has grown, the Uyghur  population now 
constitute s about 45 per cent of the region’s total and Han Chinese about 42 per cent.18 These 
shifts  appear to be  largely the consequence of ethnic Han migration into the western regions , 
includ ing as a result of incentives provided by Government policies .19  
11. Historically, the population of XUAR is one of the poorest in China. It has been the 
focus of numerous development and poverty alleviation policies by the central authorities.20 
According to State media, 2.3 million people in XUAR emerged from  poverty between 2014 
and 2018, of which 1.9 million were from southern Xinjiang, which has the highest 
population of ethnic groups .21 According to official Government information, in 2021, 
Xinjiang registered seven  per cent growth in gross domestic product (GDP) and an increase 
of per capita disposable income  for urban and rural residents of eight  per cent and 10.8 per  
cent.22 Moreover, 1.69 million rural houses and 1.56 million government -subsidized housing 
projects in cities and towns have reportedly been constructed.23 UN human rights 
mechanisms have raised concerns , however,  about  discrimination in economic, social and 
cultural sphere s in ethnic regions, including XUAR, over many years.24 
12. In July 2009, riots broke out in the regional capital Urumqi. The then United Nations 
High Commissioner for Human Rights called for an investigation into the causes of the 
violence .25The Government report ed that “from 1990 to the end of 2016, separatist, terrorist 
and extremist forces launched thousands of terrorist attacks in Xinjiang, killing large numbers of innocent people and hundreds of police officers, and causing immeasurable damage to property”.
26 There were also a series of violent incidents  in different Chinese cities  outside 
XUAR , killing scores of people, and which the Government, for its part, has consistently 
  
 17 See China Daily, “Xinjiang's population sees stable increase over past decade”, 15 June 2021. 
According to the 2020 census, XUAR’s population grew by 18.5 per cent in a decade making it one of the fastest growing regions in China, see: china2020-census-tabl e (newgeography.com) , which has 
been largely attributed to migration from other parts of the country.  
 
18 See Xinjiang Population Dynamics and Data, State Council Information Office of the People’s 
Republic of China, September 2021; National Bureau of Statistics of China, “Main data of the 
seventh population census , news release”, 11 May 2021.  
 19 See, e.g., China Daily, “Xinjiang's population sees stable increase over past decade”, 15 June 2021.  
 20 See for example the Great Western Development Strategy launched in the 1990s. See Ministry of 
Ecology and Environment, the People’s Republic of China, “ Introduction to the Implementation of 
the Great Western Development Strategy in China,” 2 November 2000.  
 21 Xinhua, “ Xinjiang makes headway in poverty alleviation”, 11 October 2019.  
 22 See “Xinjiang registers robust economic growth in 2021”, State Council Informat ion Office of the 
People’s Republic of China , 30 January 2022.  
 23 See “The Achievements of Stability and Development in Xinjiang”, Consulate -General of the 
People’s Republic of China in Auckland, New Zealand, 28 December 2020.  
 24 See, e.g., Concluding Observations of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
on the People's Republic of China, CERD/C/304/Add.15, 27 September 1996 paras. 14 (citing 
concerns with respect to, inter alia, “Muslim parts of Xinjiang”) and 18 (expressing concerns in more general terms with respect to “ethnic minority regions far removed from the Capital”), and Concluding Observations of the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights . 
 
25 See OHCHR, “UN human rights chief alarmed by high loss  of life in China’s Xinjiang region”, 7 July 
2009.  
 26 See State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, “The Fight against 
Terrorism and Extremism and Human Rights Protection in Xinjiang”, March 2019.  5 
 characterised as terrorist in character .27 At the same time, the in volvement of numbers of 
Uyghurs as fighters in armed groups, including in Afghanistan and Syria , subject to UN 
counter -terrorism sanctions, continued to be reported and remained a cause for concern for 
both the Chinese authorities and more widely  in the in ternational community.28 
13. In May 2014, in the wake of these developments, the Government launched what it 
termed  a “Strike Hard ” campaign” to combat terrorist threats, which it linked to religious 
“extremism” and separatism in XUAR .29 In a 2019 White Paper, the Government stated that 
“since 2014, Xinjiang has destroyed 1,588 violent and terrorist gangs, arrested 12,995 
terrorists, seized 2,052 explosive devices, punished 30,645 people for 4,858 illegal religious activities, and confisc ated 345,229 copies of illegal religious materials”.
30 The Government 
has asserted the success of its approach, reporting that there have been no terrorist incidents 
in XUAR since 2016.31  
 III. China’s legal and policy framework on countering terrorism an d 
“extremism”  
14. In official statements, the Government has emphasized  that “Xinjiang -related issues 
are in essence about countering violent terrorism and separatism” and that it is doing so “in accordance with law”.
32 In its March 2019 White Paper on “The F ight Against Terrorism and 
Extremism and Human Rights Protection in Xinjiang”, the Government asserted that China’s laws are “powerful legal instruments to contain and combat terrorism and extremism” and that it is upholding “the principles of protecting l awful activities, curbing illegal actions, 
containing extremism, resisting infiltration, and preventing and punishing crimes”. It also underscored that the local government in XUAR “fully respects and safeguards civil rights includin g freedom of religious belief”.  
15. In line with international law, United Nations resolutions and other instruments 
consistently stress that States’ measures to combat terrorism and violent extremism must be firmly grounded in respect for human rights and the rule of law.
33 They re cognize that 
effective counter -terrorism and counter -violent extremism measures on the one hand, and the 
protection of human rights on the other, are not conflicting goals, but complementary and mutually reinforcing. Ensuring a counter -terrorism response c ompliant with human rights 
standards requires ensuring that relevant legislation and applicable policies provide a framework that duly considers and addresses human rights risks and impacts, excludes arbitrary and discriminatory application, and incorporat es appropriate safeguards and 
remedies against violations. The UN High Commissioner and the UN Special Rapporteur on 
the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering 
  
 27 See Global Times, “Terrorists held for fatal crash”, 31 October 2013; Global Times “Police identify 
Tiananmen car crash as terrorist attack”, 30 October 2013; China Daily, “Railway attack orchestrated 
by terrorists”, 2 March 2014; The Guardian, ” Chinese police hunt for two Xinjiang men after deadly 
Tiananmen car crash”, 29 October 2013; BBC, “Four sentenced in China over Kunming station 
attack”, 12 September 2014.  
 28 E.g., Reuters, “ Syria says up to 5,000 Chinese Uighurs fighting in militant groups”, 8 May 2017.  
 29 See State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, White Paper on “The Fight 
against Terrorism and Extremism and Human Rights Protection in Xinjiang”, March 2019, stating that “separatism is the hotbed in which terrorism and extremism take root in Xinjiang”.  
 
30 See State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, White Paper on “The Fight 
against Terrorism and Extremism and Human Rights Protection in Xinjiang”, March 2019.  
 31 State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, White Paper on “ Respecting and 
Protecting the Rights of All Ethnic Groups in Xinjiang”, July 2021.  
 32 E.g., Remarks “A People-centered  Approach for Global Human Rights Progress”, by H.E. Wang Yi, 
State Councillor and Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of China, at the High-level Segment of the 46th Session of UN Human Rights Council,22 February 2021.  
 
33 E.g., UN Global Counter -Terrorism Strategy (A/RES/60/288) and the UN Plan of Action on the 
Prevention of Violent Extremism (A/70/674).  6 terrorism, among others, have highlighted how this r emains a challenge in many legal 
systems.34 
16. China has developed what it describes as an “anti -terrorism law system” 35 composed 
of specific national security and counter -terrorism legislation,36 general criminal law and 
criminal procedure law,37 as well as formal regulations pertaining to religion and “de -
extremification”.38 Most of these laws and regulations, at both national and XUAR level, 
have been adopted or revised between 2014 and 2018, in the context of the “Strike Hard” 
campaign. These evolutions have been accompanied by numerous official policy statements 
and explan atory posit ions.39 
 A. Clarity, breadth and scope of concepts of “terrorism” and “extremism”  
17. Both the PRC Counterterrorism Law (“CTL”) and the Xinjiang Implementing 
Measures for the PRC Counterterrorism Law (“XIM”) define terrorism as :  
“propositions  and a ctions that create social panic, endanger public safety, attack 
persons  or property, or coerce national organs or international organizations, through 
methods such as violence, destruction intimidation, so as to achieve their political, 
ideological, or oth er objectives”.40  
18. Elements of the definition are broadly worded.  Notions such as  “propositions”, “social 
panic” and “other objectives” are not clearly defined and might potentially encompass a wide 
range of acts that are substantially removed from a sufficient threshold of seriousness and  
demonstrable intent to engag e in terrorist conduct .41 In both the CTL and the XIM,  the 
definition of terrorism is further accompanied by a list of  acts that constitute  “terrorist 
activities” that provide some clarity to the definition:  
“For the purpose of this Law, “terrorist activities” means the following conduct of the 
terrorist natu re: (1) Organizing, planning, preparing for, or conducting the activities 
which cause or attempt to cause casualties, grave property loss, damage to public facilities, disruption of social order and other serious social harm; (2) Advocating terrorism, instigating terrorist activities, or illegally holding articles advocating terrorism, or forcing other persons to wear costume or symbols advocating terrorism in public places; (3) Organizing, leading or participating in terrorist organizations; (4) Providing information, funds, materials, labor services, technologies, places and other 
  
 34 See, e.g., Report of the U N High Commissioner for Human Rights on “best practices and lessons 
learned on how protecting and promoting human right s contribute to preventing and countering 
violent extremism” (A/HRC/33/29), 21 July 2016 and “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the 
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism” 
(A/HRC/43/46), 21 February 2020. See also comments of the UN Special Rapporteur on legislation 
and policies of various States across the globe: https://www.ohchr.org/en/special -procedures/sr -
terrorism/comments -legislation -and-policy.  
 35 White Paper on “The Fight Against Terrorism and  Extremism and Human Rights Protection in 
Xinjiang”, March 2019.  
 36 National Security Law of 2015; Counterterrorism Law of 2015; XUAR Implementing Measures for 
the PRC Counterterrorism Law of 2016 (amended in 2018).  
 37 Criminal Law of China (and its variou s amendments); Criminal Procedure Law of China (and its 
various amendments); Opinions on Certain Issues Concerning the Application of Law in Handling Criminal Cases Involving Terrorism and Extremism (jointly issued by the Supreme People’s Court, 
the Suprem e People’s Procuratorate, Ministry of Public Security and Ministry of Justice in March 
2018).  
 
38 Religious Affairs Regulation (as amended in 2017); XUAR Religious Affairs Regulation (as amended 
in 2014); XUAR Regulation on De -extremification of 2017 (amend ed in 2018).  
 39 E.g., the Government’s 11 White Papers on the situation in XUAR: 
http://english.www.gov.cn/archive/whitepaper/page_1.html .  
 40 Article 3, CTL; Article 3, XIM.  
 41 See “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism: Ten areas of best practices in countering terrorism” 
(A/HRC/16/51), 22 December 2010, para. 28, for an overview of conditi ons for a human rights -
compliant definition of terrorism and proposing a model definition of terrorism as best practice. The 
Special Rapporteur’s model definition is also in line with Security Council resolution 1566 (2004).  7 
 support, assistance and convenience to terrorist organizations, terrorists, the 
implementation of terrorist activities or training on terrorist activities; (5) Other terrorist ac tivities” (unofficial translation).
42  
19. The listed activities generally correspond to the conduct that is criminalized in the 
Criminal Law.43 However, again, a number of the activities listed remain stated in vague 
and/or subjective terms without further clarification as to the content of what these may encompass, e.g., “disruption of social order and other serious social harm”.
44  
20. Further clarification on the interpretation of the relevant provisions was provided in 
the March 2018 “Opinions on Certain Issue s Concerning the Application of Law in Handling 
Criminal Cases Involving Terrorism and Extremism” issued jointly by the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme People’s Procuratorate, Ministry of Public Security and Ministry of Justice. In the Opinion, some  guidance is provided on the interpretation and application of 
certain terms of article 120 of the Criminal Law pertaining to the formation, leading or active participation in a terrorist organization. While helpful in further defining certain activities 
considered terrorist, the Opinion does not address all concerns, including for example the 
scope of the term “extremism” in the description of various terrorist offences as discussed 
below.  
21. As such, there are concerns that  the scope of the definitions leaves the potential that 
acts of legitimate protest, dissent and other human rights activities, or of genuine religious activity, can fall within the ambit of “terrorism” or “terrorist activities”, and consequently for the imposition of coerci ve legal restrictions on legitimate activity protected under 
international human rights law.
45 Such provisions are vulnerable to being used –  deliberately 
or inadvertently –  in a discriminatory or otherwise arbitrary manner against individuals or 
communiti es.  
22. In relation to “extremism” , the Xinjiang Religious Affairs Regulation (“XRAR”) sets 
out a  definition of “religious extremism” refer ring to 
“the distortion of religious teachings and the promotion of extremism, as well as other extremes of thought, spe ech and behavior such as the promotion of violence, social 
hatred and anti -humanity”.
46 
As such, the XRAR prohibits “extremist… ideas”, “thought”, “activities”, “clothing”, “symbols”, “signs” and “content”, but provides little clarity on what  constitutes these  
elements such as to  render them “extremist”.  
23. The XUAR Regulation on De -extremification ( “XRD ”) defines  “extremism” as 
“propositions and conduct using distortion of religious teachings or other means to incite hatred or discrimination and advocate violence”, and “extremification” as “speech and actions under the influence of extremism, that spread radical religious ideology, and reject and interfere with normal production and livelihood”.
47 This regulation also contains an 
open- ended list of “primary e xpressions of extremification”, all of which are to be prohibited, 
including “interfering with normal cultural and recreational activities, rejecting or refusing 
public goods and services such as radio and television”, “spreading religious fanaticism through irregular beards or name selection”, and “deliberately interfering with or undermining the implementation of family planning policies”.
48 In this regard, it is notable 
that Chinese law and policy consistently refer to “extremism” generally, without the critical 
qualifying adjective “violent”, as UN instruments approach the issue.49 
  
 42 Article 3, CTL. See also Art icle 6, XIM.  
 43 Art. 120 and following, CL.  
 44 See also article 6, XIM , which is stated in similar terms.  
 45 Letter by a group of Special Procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council addressed to 
China, OL CHN 18/2019, p. 4-5, 1 November 2019.  
 46 Article 65, XRAR (unofficial translation).  
 47 Article 3, XRD (unofficial translation).  
 48 Article 9 (5, 8, 14), XRD (unofficial translation).  
 49 E.g., UN Plan of Action on the Prevention of Violent Extremism (A/70/674).  8 24. As such, the legal texts appear to conflate what might otherwise be construed as 
matters of per sonal choice in relation to religious practice with “extremism”50, and 
“extremism” with the phenomenon of terrorism,51 significantly broadening the range of 
conduct that can be targeted under a counter -terrorism objective or pretext. Such conflation 
throug h the application of broadly stated or vague definitions pose particular problems in 
relation to criminalization under Chinese criminal law, for example, of the “promotion of 
terrorism and extremism through books, audio and video materials”52 or the “posse ssion of 
books, audio and video materials or other things despite being aware that they produce, 
distribute and preach terrorism or extremism”.53 Owing to the highly subjective notions of 
what defines or constitutes “extremism”, the UN Special Rapporteur o n the promotion and 
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism has argued that  
“the term … has no purchase in binding international legal standards and, when operative as a criminal legal category, is irreconcilable wit h the principle of legal 
certainty; it is therefore per se incompatible with the exercise of certain fundamental 
human rights.”
54 
 B. Methodologies applied to identify suspects and persons “at risk” of “extremism”  
25. As mentioned, the  2017 XUAR Regulation on De -extremification (“XRD”) includes 
a list of 15 “primary expressions of extremification”, described as “words and actions under 
the influence of extremism”, to be prohibited.55 This list may have been an attempt at 
standardizing and codifying a number of such lists that had emerged in various localities in XUAR, most notably a list of 75 signs of religious extremism that local authorities and police departments had reportedly started distributing in December 2014.
56 These lists of “signs” 
and “primary expr essions” of religious extremism include conduct that falls well within the 
exercise of fundamental freedoms and which are not, per se , linked with violence or potential 
violent action. Examples include “rejecting or refusing radio and television”;57 being “young 
and middle -aged men with a big beard”58; “suddenly quit [ing]  drinking and smoking, and not 
interacting with others who do drink and smoke”59; and “resisting normal cultural and sports 
activities such as football and singing competitions”;60 among others.  
26. Various forms of conduct associated with the expression of different opinions, stated 
in broad terms, are also considered a sign of “extremism”. These include, for instance, “resisting current policies and regulations”;
61 “using mobile phone text messages and 
WeChat and other social chat software to exchange learning experience, read illegal religious propaganda materials”;
62 “carrying illegal political and religious books and audio- visual 
products or checking them at the residenc e”;63 or “using satellite receivers, Internet, radio 
  
 50 Apparent, for example, in article 4 of the XRD, which states that the aim of “de-extremification” is to 
“make religion more Chinese” and “guide religions to become compatible with socialist society” 
(unofficial translation).  
 51 Apparent, for example, in article 4 of the CTL, describing “extremism” as the ideological basis of 
terrorism. See also  White Paper on “The Fight Against Terrorism and Extremism and Human Rights 
Protection in Xinjiang”, March 2019.  
 52 Article 120c, CL (unofficial translation).  
 53 Article 120f, CL (unofficial translation).  
 54 “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms while countering terrorism” (A/HRC/43/46), 21 February 2020, para. 14.  
 55 Article 9, XRD (unofficial translation).  
 56 For example, Sina news, “Xinjiang local authorities organise people to identify 75 religious 
extremes” (unofficial translation), 24 December 2014, available at http://news.sina.com.cn/c/2014 -12-
24/093231321497.shtml .  
 57 Article 9.5, XRD (unofficial translation).  
 58 Sign 9 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation). See also article 9.8, XRD, 
referring to “irregular beards”.  
 59 Sign 10 on list of 75 signs of relig ious extremism (unofficial translation).  
 60 Sign 15 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation).  
 61 Sign 2 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation).  
 62 Sign 39 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation).  
 63 Sign 40 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation).  9 
 and other equipment to illegally listen to, watch, and spread overseas religious radio and 
television programs”,64 “resisting government propaganda” and “refusing to watch normal 
movies and TV networks”65. 
27. Furthermore, the lists include violations of other laws and policies, for example family 
planning policies66. This means that a  person breaching such other law or policy is not only 
exposed to the sanctions provided under that law or policy for its  own breach , but may also 
fall within the ambit of what is considered as “extremist” with additional consequences on 
that basis , such as criminal punishment and/or “re -education”, as discussed below .  
28. These lists of indicators for identifying persons “at risk” of “extremism” or terrorism 
appear to be based on  elements that do not necessarily serve as actual and substantive 
indicators that an individual has engaged, or is at risk of engaging in,  violent extremist or 
terrorist conduct . Rather , they appear ba sed on a simplistic association of these indicators 
with “terrorism” or “extremism”, whereas many of these indicators, taken individually (and 
even collectively) may merely be manifestations of  nothing more or less than personal choice 
in the practice of I slamic religious beliefs and/or legitimate expression of opinion. The  use 
of methodologies based on such subjective or superficial “risk factors” and which overemphasize elements of what might otherwise be considered as legitimate religious practice, cultu ral preference, or a matter of personal choice, risks casting a wide net to subject 
individuals (who have no connection with violent extremism or terrorism) to these laws and 
policies, unpredictable outcomes and potentially arbitrary  application of law and  policy .
67 
The imposition of coercive sanctions on the basis of  indicators tha t encompass  conduct  that 
may amount to the legitimate exercise of  rights  to freedom of religion,  carries  serious risk of 
discriminatory  application and  use as profiling tool s on individuals primarily on grounds of 
their ethno -religious identity and individual expressions thereof.  
 C. Scope and nature of responses to alleged “terrorist” or “extremist” conduct  
29. In its August 2019 White Paper on “ Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang ”, 
the Government explained that its system s ought to balance harsh punishment for serious 
acts, with compassion, leniency, education and rehabilitation for minor cases. Under that 
system, judgment and punishment is meted out by criminal courts  for serious acts, whereas 
an administrative track deals with more “minor” cases. This administrative track involves so -
called “Vocational Education and Training Centres” (VETC  facilitie s),68 which are facilities 
where individuals can be placed for “deradi calization” and “re- education”. The significant 
distinction between what constitutes “serious” and “minor” acts of terrorism and/or “extremist” acts is unclear, with the same types of conduct often included under both legal 
categories. This creates a furth er level of uncertainty for the population at large as to which 
cases must (or can be) decided in formal court proceedings, and which will (or may) be 
handled administratively. Moreover, the differentiation between the categories of cases according to an a ssessment of “gravity” is itself based on undefined criteria ( such as 
“circumstances are minor”,
69 a person “poses a real danger but has not yet caused actual 
consequences”,70 a person’s “subjective malice is not deep and they can sincerely repent”,71 
  
 64 Sign 41 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation).  
 65 Sign 43 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unoff icial translation).  
 66 Article 9.14, XRD.  
 67 The UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms while countering terrorism has highlighted the pitfalls of risk models that are tainted by 
prejudice or ignoranc e, generate unpredictability in the monitored communities, open up 
administrative arbitrariness, and lack judicial supervision. See “Report of the Special Rapporteur on 
the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism” 
(A/HRC/43/46), 21 February 2020, para. 17.  
 68 OHCHR is cognizant of the research that has been conducted with regard to the various forms of 
facilities in XUAR. For purposes of this assessment, however, it has opted to refer to VETC  facilitie s 
generically as facilities providing “de-radicalisation” education and training, as per the Government’s 
White Paper of August 2019 on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang”.   
 69 Article 38, XIM (after 2018 amendment) (unofficial translation).  
 70 Article 39, XIM (after 2018 amendment) (unofficial translation).  
 71 Article 39, XIM (after 2018 amendment) (unofficial translation).  10 or a person “still [is] a threat to society”72). These broadly worded requirements create 
significant scope for arbitrary , inconsistent  and subjective application of the law. As such, 
the same act could readily lead to quite different and unpredictable legal consequences.  
30. Furthermore , under the law, each intervening authority at every stage of the process 
(be it police, prosecutor, judge,  or enforcement official), whether in the criminal or 
administrative track, can make the determination that “education” is deemed warranted and 
can direct the transfer of an individual to a VETC  facility . A placement in such facility thus 
becomes an availa ble consequence of having committed any type of act that can be construed 
as “terrorism” or “extremism”, regardless of whether the person is also criminally prosecuted. 
There are further concerns  that the law fails to provide sufficient legal certainty on core 
elements of the “ education and transformation” system itself, such as the permissible duration 
for such residential programmes in VETC  facilitie s or the criteria or procedure according to 
which individuals are or can be deemed appropriately “ educated ” and thereby liable for 
release.  
 D. Breadth of preventive, investigative and coercive powers, and degree of oversight and redress  
31. Under applicable law, public  security organs, and the executive more broadly, are 
given far -reaching powers to prevent, inves tigate and respond to terrorist and “extremist” 
acts.
73 The Counterterrorism Law (“CTL”) and Xinjiang Implementing Measures (“XIM”), 
for example, authorize public security organs to employ “technological investigative measures” and to collect and retain data regarding numerous  aspects of individuals’ lives, 
including personal data and biometric data.
74 The Criminal Procedure Law (“CPL”) allows 
these authorities to use special investigative techniques, including electronic surveillance,75 
while the CTL authorizes imposition of a range of restrictive measures on suspects, including orders not to leave the  city, not to use public transport, not to communicate with certain 
persons, to hand over passports, or to periodically report to the authorities.
76 Under the law, 
other entities also have a role and must cooperate with the authorities. For example, teleco mmunications and internet providers must put information content monitoring systems 
in place and provide public security officials with decryption and other technical support,
77 
and local governments are required to use technology, alongside other measures , to prevent 
the spread of terrorism and “extremism”78 and to ensure that “public areas of the city as 
needed” are equipped with “public security video image information systems”.79 
32. These  specific counter -terrorism powers come in addition to the general powers of the 
public security organs to take suspects into custody and pre -trial detention for lengthy periods 
without independent review, contrary to international human rights law and standards. For example, under the CPL, a person can be in detention for up to 37 days before any formal 
review and decision that an arrest is warranted.
80 
33. With respect to the exercise of powers under the CTL, article 94 punishes the abuse 
of power by personnel of counter -terrorism institutions and “other conduct violating laws  or 
  
 72 Article 42, XIM (after 2018 amendment) (unofficial translation).  
 73 E.g., articles 17 -67, CTL;  articles 16 -37, XIM.  
 74 E.g., articles 45, 50, CTL; article 31, XIM ( after 2018 amendment ). 
 75 Article 150, CPL (and following).  
 76 Article 53, CTL.  
77 Articles 18 -19, CTL.  
 78 Article 16, XIM ( after 2018 amendment ). 
 79 Article 27, CTL.  
 80 See articles 80, 82, 91, CPL. Following its visit to China in 2004, the UN Working Group on 
Arbitrary Detention noted that the holding of a person in police custody for more than four to five 
days was problematic under the international requirement of promptne ss. It also found that the 
requirement that the arrest be approved by the procurator fails to meet international standards, 
because it does not bring the person before a judicial organ and because the procurator is 
insufficiently independent to be consider ed exercising judicial power (as required by art. 9.3, ICCPR). 
See Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention: Mission to China, E/CN.4/2005/6/Add.4, 
29 December 2004, para. 32.  11 
 discipline”.81 Article 62 of the XIM,82 in turn, provides that staff of counter -terrorism 
institutions and relevant departments who “fail to perform their duties in counter -terrorism 
work” may be reprimanded and educated, given administrative sanctions  where the 
circumstances are serious and held criminally responsible where a crime was committed.83 
Article 96 of the CTL also provides that where “relevant units or individuals” are unsatisfied 
with a decision under the CTL to impose administrative punishment or administrative 
compulsory measures, they may apply for administrative reconsideration or ra ise an 
administrative lawsuit.84  
34. OHCHR does not have information on the degree to which these remedies are 
implemented, either in absolute terms or as a proportion of relevant cases, or, where they are 
implemented, their effectiveness in ending a breach o f rights and providing effective remedy. 
For their part, the applicable legal texts themselves suggest there is only limited , if any,  
independent judicial oversight  of the authorities exercising the powers conferred to them 
under the counter -terrorism and counter -“extremism” laws and policies , increasing the risk 
of discriminatory or arbitrary application . The broad and far -reaching legal powers given to 
the authorities under  Chinese legislation require comprehensive and transparent regulation, 
in line with the principles of legality, necessity, proportionality and accountability,85 in order 
to remain consistent with human rights and fundamental freedoms, notably to p rotect rights 
to privacy and to freedom of movement, expression and religion.  
35. In summary, t he Chinese “anti -terrorism law system”86 is based on vague and broad 
concepts that grant significant discretion to diverse officials as to their interpretation and 
application. Methods set out under the framework to identify and assess problematic conduct 
are simplistic and prone to subjectivity , and do not appear to be based in empirically obtained 
evidence that establishes the links between the indicators of conduct  relied on and terrorism 
or violent extremism. Furthermore, t he legal consequences attached to such conduct are 
unpredictable and insufficiently regulated. Authorities are granted  broad investigative, 
preventive and coercive powers with limited safeguards and independent judicial oversight. 
Individually and cumulatively, these factors  present significant concerns as to the system’s 
compliance with international human rights law, establishing a framework that is vulnerable to arbitrary and discriminatory application, unjustifiably limits the exercise of legitimate rights, potentially subjects individuals to arbitrary detention, and fails to provide adequate 
safeguards  to protect against abuse. In the  context in which this  system is implemented and 
by associating “extremism” with certain religious and cultural practices, it also carries 
inherent risk of unnecessar y, disproportionate, and discriminator y application to the ethnic 
and religious communities  concerned . 
 IV. Impr isonment and other forms of deprivation of liberty  
36. As indicated above, the Government has explained that its counter -terrorism and 
counter -“extremism” system is based on a distinction between “serious” acts that merit  
punishment through the criminal justi ce system and “minor” cases that require leniency, 
education and rehabilitation. Under the latter, administrative track, individuals of concern would generally be placed in a so- called “Vocational Education and Training Centre” 
(VETC).
87 The Government has  maintained that the VETC  facilitie s have been closed since 
2019.88  
  
 81 Unofficial translation.  
 82 Version after 2018 amendment.  
 83 Unoffic ial translation.  
 84 The Implementing Measures for XUAR (XIM) do not appear to include a similar provision.  
 85 See also Other Letter by a group of Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council addressed to 
China, 1 November 2019, OL CHN 18/2019, p. 11, 16- 17. 
 86 State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, White Paper on “The Fight 
Against Terrorism and Extremism and Human Rights Protection in Xinjiang”, March 2019.  
 87 August 2019 White Paper on “ Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang” . 
 88 The August 2019 White Paper on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang”  stated that “as 
 12  A. Referrals to “Vocational Education and Training Centres” 
37. In October 2018, s hortly after the Government first stated  the existence of  “vocational 
training centres”, the Xinjiang Implementing Measures for the P.R.C. Counter -Terrorism 
Law (“XIM”) and the XUAR Regulation on De -extremification (“XRD”) were both revised 
to explicitly introduce provisions permitting the establishment of such c entres.89 In mid -
2019, in a follow -up response to the CERD Committee, the Government reported that it had 
established  "vocational education and training centres, in accordance with the law, to 
eradicate the breeding ground and conditions for the spread of terrorism and religious 
extremism “”.90 
38. According to the Government’s 2019 White Paper on “ Vocational Education and 
Training in Xinjiang ” and relevant legal provisions, three categories of individuals can be 
held in such centres. The first category includes  individuals who have been convicted for 
terrorist or “extremist” crimes and who are, upon completion of their sentence “assessed as 
still posing a potential threat to society”.91 Such people are, according to the law, sent to 
VETC  facilities  by a court de cision.92 The second category includes “people who were 
incited, coerced or induced into participating in terrorist or extremist activities, or people who participated in terrorist or extremist activities in circumstances that were not serious enough to co nstitute a crime”.
93 Those people can be referred to VETC  facilitie s upon a decision of 
the police.94 The third category consists of “people who were incited, coerced or induced into 
participating in terrorist or extremist activities, or people who participated in terrorist or extremist activities that posed a real danger but did not cause actual harm”.
95 In these cases 
the procuratorate can decide to waive a sentence on the condition that the offender’s 
“subjective malice is not deep and they can sincerely repent and voluntarily accept education and assistance”.
96 
39. In the same 2019 White Paper, the Government stated that “education and training [in 
VETC  facilities ] is not a measure to limit or circumscribe the freedom of the person”, while  
in its r esponse to the CERD Committee it stated that VETC  facilitie s are “schools by 
nature ”.97 Under international human rights law, however, a deprivation of liberty occurs 
when a person “is being held without his or her free consent”,98 involving a “more severe  
restriction of motion within a narrower space than mere interference with liberty of 
  
education and training has played its role, most trainees have reached the required standards and 
graduated” and that “many of the trai nees” have gone on to find employment in factories or 
enterprises”. In December 2019, Shohrat Zakir, chairman of the regional Government of XUAR, 
speaking at a press conference in Beijing, stated that trainees at VETCs in XUAR “have all 
graduated”, see Xin hua, “ Trainees in Xinjiang education, training program have all graduated: 
official”, 9 December 2019.  
 89 Articles 38 -39, 44, XIM (after 2018 amendment); Article 17, XRD (after 201 8 amendment).  
 90 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination , Information received from China on 
follow -up to the concluding observations on its combined fourteenth to seventeenth  periodic reports , 
9 October 2019, CERD/C/CHN/FCO/14 -17, p.2.  
 91 Quote from the 2019 White Paper on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang ” (original 
document in English).  
 92 Article 30, CTL; article 42, XIM (after 2018 amendment).  
 93 Quote from the 2019 White Paper on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang ” (original 
document in English).  
 94 Article 38, XIM (after 2018 amendment).  
 95 Quote from the 2019 White Paper on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang ” (original 
document in English).  
 96 Article 39, XIM (after 2018 amendment) (unofficial translation). The White Paper refers in English to individuals “whose subjective culpability was not deep, who acknowledged their offences and were 
contrite about their past actions and thus do not need to be sentenced to or can be exempted from punishment, and who have demonstrated the willingness to receive training”.  
 
97 UN Committee on the Elimination  of Racial Discrimination, Information received from China on 
follow -up to the concluding observations on its combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic reports , 
9 October 2019, CERD/C/CHN/FCO/14 -17, p. 3 -4. 
 98 Report of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, para. 51, 19 July 2017, A/HRC/36/37.  13 
 movement”.99 A deprivation of liberty , within the meaning of international human rights law,  
can occur in any type of location and does not need to be officially labelled as such.  
40. The 2019 White Paper on “ Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang ” states that 
the centres are “residential ”, and that referral follows a decision by the court or public security 
officials, rather than being voluntary. This is the case even for referrals by the procuratorate, 
where the concerned individual is given a “choice” between referral to a VETC facility a nd 
a prison sentence, implying that placement in a VETC is a form of alternative sanction to a prison sentence.  
41. Individuals  interviewed by OHCHR who had been placed in VETC  facilities 
described being taken to such facilities , usually by public security officials. The majority of 
the interviewees who were apprehended between  2017 and 2019 were held at a police station 
before referral to a VETC  facility .
100 They said that they were told that they had to go to a 
VETC  facility  and were not given an alternative option. None of the interviewees felt they 
could challenge the referral process, and none had access to a lawyer  prior to being sent to 
the VETC facility nor at any point during the time they were present there . Several underwent 
long interrogations in police stations before their eventual placement.  
42. Not a single interviewee said they were able to exit the facility or go home for a visit.  
At the VETC facilities, all interviewees observed significant security presence and guards armed wi th guns and/or batons (including electric ones), and mostly wearing police 
uniforms.
101 Lengths of stays in the VETC facilities varied, but generally interviewees spent 
between two months and 18 months in the facilities. None of them were informed of the 
length of their stays when they were taken to the facility. About half of the interviewees 
reported that they were allowed occasional visits by or phone calls with a relative, although only under close surveillance.
102 The other half had no contact with their  family and often 
their families did not know where they were.103  
43. Chinese Government -affiliated media  has regularly disseminated promotional videos 
about VETC  facilitie s. Those interviewed in such videos either welcomed  their stays or sa id 
that it ha d helped them from being drawn to terrorism or “ extremism ”.104 Those interviewed 
by OHCHR , in contrast,  said they were explicitly told by guards to be positive about their 
experience in the facility when outsiders or family members would visit.105 One interviewee, 
for example,  reported that ahead of a visit by a foreign delegation they were told to say that 
“everything was fine ”, that they could return home every night, that they were studying and 
that the food was acceptable .106 Moreover, some interviewees reported being explicitly 
prohibited to disclose any information about the facility once released, with some having to 
sign a document to this effect.107 
  
 99 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment no. 35, para. 5, 16 December 2014, 
CCPR/C/GC/35.  
 100 OHCHR interviews. Interviewees often used the term “camps” to describe the facilities. While 
OHCHR is confident that most of these facilities as described by interviewees were in fact VETCs, it 
is possible that some were in fact pre-trial detention facilities.  
 101 OHCHR interviews. See also the “Xinjiang Police Files” which contain various images of armed 
guards in VETC facilities. See, “Xinjiang Police Files”, Victims of Communism Memorial 
Foundation, May 2022 (Hereafter, the “Xinjiang Police Files”).  
 102 OHCHR interviews.  
 103 OHCHR interviews.  
 104 See, for example,  “What do trainees do in Xinjiang’s vocational education and training centers?” ; and 
“Only Westerners hate changes from the opening of vocational education & training centers in 
Xinjiang” (available  on YouTube) . 
 105 OHCHR interviews.  
 106 OHCHR interview.  
 107 OHCHR interviews. This further comports with the “Telegram”, which also calls on staff working in 
the VETC  facilitie s to exercise “strict secrecy”. See “The China Cables”: “The Telegram”, para. 25, 
as released by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, 24 November 2019 (hereafter 
“China Cables”).  14 44. The Government has claimed that “attendees are free to join or quit programs at any 
time”.108 Consistent accounts  obtained by OHCHR, however,  indicate  a lack of free and 
informed consent to being placed in the centres; that it is impossible for an individual 
detained in such a heavily guarded centre to leave of their own free will; and that a stay i n a 
VETC facility is, from the concerned individual’s perspective, of indefinite nature, the end of which is only determined by meeting undefined criteria as evaluated by the authorities.  As 
such, given that placement in the VETC facilities is not voluntar y and the individuals placed 
in such centres appear to have had no choice, placements in VETC facilities amount to a form of deprivation of liberty.
109 
45. International human rights law  requires deprivations of liberty  not to be arbitrary. The 
prohibition of a rbitrary detention , enshrined in articles 9 of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , is both a norm 
of customary international law and peremptory norm of international law.110 As the UN 
Human  Rights Committee, monitoring the implementation of the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights, has explained in authoritative guidance, the notion of “arbitrariness” is not to be equated with “against the law”: an arrest or detention may be authorized by domestic law and nonetheless be arbitrary, when there are elements of inappropriateness, injustice, lack of predictability and due process of law, as well as lack of elements of reasonableness, necessity and proportionality.
111 In the same vei n, the UN 
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention that assesses complaints of arbitrary detention from individual complainants in member states,  for its part, considers a deprivation of liberty 
arbitrary when it is clearly impossible to invoke any legal basis  justifying the deprivation of 
liberty, including cases of deprivation of liberty in the absence of any legislative provision , 
as well as in cases of grave non -observance of the international norms relating to the right to 
a fair trial.
112 Such protections include the right to be informed of one’s rights and the reasons 
for arrest, and to have sufficient access to lawyers and family members.113 Under 
international human rights law, a detention is also arbitrary when used in response to the 
legitimate exercise  of human rights, such as the exercise of the rights to freedom of opinion 
or expression, freedom to leave one’s own country, freedom of religion, and the right of 
minorities to enjoy their own culture, profess their own religion or use their own language.114 
46. Several key features of the VETC system raise concern from this perspective . Firstly, 
deprivations of liberty in residential facilities appear to have been without any apparent legal basis for a considerable period. The Xinjiang Implementing Measures for the P.R.C. Counter -
Terrorism Law (“XIM”) and the XUAR Regulation on De -extremification (“XRD”) were 
amended in October 2018 to authorize the establishment of  the VETCs and the referral of 
individuals for residential programmes,
115 although the wave of referrals to VETCs had 
  
 108 Xinhua news, “Trainees in Xinjiang, education, training program have all graduated: official”, 9 
December 2019.  
 109 See also recent op inion by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, A/HRC/WGAD/2022/6, 
23 May 2022, paras. 28 and 29 in which it recalls its position that “re -education centres” are places of 
deprivation of liberty.  This also comports to some extent with the “Telegram”,  from the China Cables, 
which describes the functioning of the VETC  facilitie s and sets out that “it is strictly forbidden for 
police to enter the student zone with guns, and they must never allow escapes”. See also, the “Xinjiang Police Files”, internal d irectives, “Incident response plan in case of escapes during outdoor 
activities”, which reportedly allows for “shoot to kill” instructions in the case of escapes.  
 
110 Report of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, A/HRC/22/44 (24 December 2012), par a. 
79. 
 111 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 35 - Article 9 (Liberty and security of person), 
CCPR/C/GC/35 (16 December 2014), para. 12.  
 112 UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Revised Fact Sheet No. 26, 8 February 2019, p. 5- 7. 
 113 See articles 10 -11, UDHR; articles 9 and 14, ICCPR; UN Human Rights Committee, General 
Comment No. 32 - Article 14: Right to equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial, 
CCPR/C/GC/32, 23 August 2007; and Report of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention - 
United Nations Basic Principles and Guidelines on Remedies and Procedures on the Right of Anyone 
Deprived of Their Liberty to Bring Proceedings Before a Court, A/HRC/30/37, 6 July 2015.  
 114 UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Revised Fact Sheet No. 26, 8 February 2019, p. 5- 7. 
 115 Except for the category of convicted criminals who are considered too dangerous for release, for which such programme was authorized before (see article 30, CTL). The residential nature of the 
 15 
 already commenced well prior, from April 2017.116 Further, as discussed above, the XIM and 
XRD are vague in scope, vulnerable to overly broa d interpretations , and therefore  arbitrary 
and discriminatory application.  
47. Secondly, a s described above, the grounds on which individuals can be referred to and 
placed in VETCs encompass conduct that is prima facie  lawful, including as  an expression 
or ma nifestation of the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms.  Various innocuous 
reasons for referral to a VETC are described in the so -called “Karakax list”, a document 
which is in the public domain appearing to be a G overnment document possibly from 201 9 
and highly likely to be authentic. This list, consisting of a spreadsheet with information about 
Uyghur “trainees” in VETC facilities in one specific district in XUAR, includes 311 individuals and the reasons for their referral. These reasons include having too many children, being an “unsafe person,” being born in certain years, being an ex -convict, wearing a veil or 
beard, having applied for a passport and not having left the country, and so on.
117 Similar 
reasons for referral were reported to OHCHR by former detainees, who described referral to 
VETC facilities for travelling or for having foreign connections, attempting to cancel their 
Chinese citizenship, possessing dual registration in a neighbou ring country, or for having 
downloaded WhatsApp. Others were simply told that they were on a list or that a quota had to be fulfilled.  Due to the subjective means by which assessments appear to be conducted, 
the risk of arbitrary detention of persons in VETC facilitie s is acute.  
48. Thirdly, placements in VETCs appear to lack the process due in any context of 
detention , effectively depriving  concerned individuals of the safeguards and protections that 
must accompany detentions as a matter of international law. Detainees do not appear to have 
access to lawyers or to be informed of the duration for their placement or the criteria for 
release, which are not spelled out in the law. Persons with which OHCHR spoke described some form of process , often shortly before t heir release, at which they were “informed” of 
their wrongdoing, of the  authorities’  leniency in their case and of their sentencing  to a prison 
term that subsequently seemed to have been waived (as evidenced by their release). These accounts comport and al ign with other indications that, around October 2018, there was an 
attempt to retroactively “regularize” the status of people in the VETC facilities. As explained above, on 9 October 2018, XUAR laws were amended to explicitly authorize their establishment and use.
118 In a video published on 16 October 2018,119 the Government also 
referred to “twice inform and once announce” sessions, a quasi -legal process in which the 
authorities inform the person  and their family  about the nature of their involvement in 
terrorist activities, further inform them about the nature of their involvement in “ extremist”  
activities, and thereupon announce the Government’s policy of showing leniency in 
accordance with the law.120 One interv iewee described his experience as follows : “I was not 
  
programmes is apparen t, for example, in article 45 of the XIM (2018 version), in which relevant 
departments are instructed to carry out educational activities “so as to create conditions for persons 
receiving education and training to re-enter society and return to their famil ies” (unofficial 
translation).  
 116 Some experts have also argued that the legal basis created in October 2018 is inadequate under 
Chinese law itself, asserting that under applicable Chinese law, the power to deprive an individual of 
their liberty must be au thorized by laws passed by the National People’s Committee or its Standing 
Committee (Article 7, Legislation Law), and that the 2018 revisions were undertaken in laws that do 
not fulfil this domestic requirement of legality. See , for example,  J. Daum, Expl ainer on Xinjiang 
Regulations, 11 October 2018 (https://www.chinalawtranslate.com/en/explainer -on-xinjiang -
regulations/).  
 117 See the “Karakax  List”, published by various media outlets, February 2020. Another such list is 
contained in the “Xinjiang Police Files”, which also refers to similar reasons for detention.  
 118 Articles 38 -39, 44, XIM (after 2018 amendment); Article 17, XRD (after 2018 amendment).  
 119 Focus interview, at 3.27 minutes, at 
http://tv.cctv.com/2018/10/16/VIDEVvr9aq34SsDMrB6IRGnh181016.shtml . 
 120 Such sessions may be a reflection of the policy intro duced with the October 2018 revision of the law, 
where the Procuratorate can decide to show leniency and waive criminal punishment in return for confession, repentance and an agreement to go to a VETC (Articles 38 -46, XIM after 2018 
amendment). It also coi ncides with an October 2018 amendment to the Chinese Criminal Procedure 
Law that formalized a plea bargain system, whereby the accused can confess, repent and accept a sentence (Article 15, CPL).  16 told what I was there for and how long I would be there. I was asked to confess a crime, but 
I did not know what I was supposed to confess to.”121 
49. A number of interviewees described being “sentenced” in the VETC  facility ,122 and 
some described being brought to the “court” in groups.123 No lawyers were present at these 
sessions and persons interviewed reported being required to “choose” their offences from a list of some 75 or 72 “crimes”.
124 Such proceedings  – in many cases taking place after months 
of detention – suggest that the criminal and administrative tracks to address allegations of 
“extremism” and “terrorism” offences have in practice often been intertwined, with criminal 
proceedings apparently being used to pressure people into accepting a referral to a VETC 
facility, to retroactively justify such referrals, or to curtail and control people post- release 
through a provisional release order that can be revoked. In essence, the combination of these processes provides officials with effective power of extraordinary brea dth to subject 
individuals to deprivation of liberty and to return them thereto after  release.  
50. Fourthly, the nature and functional purpose of the educational programmes in VETC 
facilities also pose concern given their orientation towards political re- education . The XIM 
states that the purpose of the VETCs is to both educate and rehabilitate people who have been influenced by “extremism”, including in “ occupational skills education and training centres 
and other education and transformation establishments” .
125 The Government’s White Paper 
on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang” states that the VETCs “deliver a 
curriculum that includes standard spoken and written Chinese, understanding of the law, 
vocational skills, and deradicalization .” In its examination of China under the Discrimination 
(Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111) and the Employment Policy Convention, 1964 (No. 122), the ILO Committee of Experts on the Enforcement and Application of Standards expressed concern that the vocational training policy was “at least in part carried out in high -security and high surveillance settings”
126 and requested the 
Government to re -orient the mandate of vocational training and education centres “from 
political re -education based on administrative detention towards the broader purposes of the 
Convention”, namely full, productive and freely chosen employment.127 OHCHR requested 
but did not receive from the Government information on the curriculum and skills recognition 
system in the centres. First -hand accounts to OHCHR, however,  revealed a strong emphasis 
on “political teachings” and rehabilitation based on self -criticism.128 Such coercive 
administrative measures129 are cons idered “inherently arbitrary” by the UN Working Group 
on Arbitrary Detention.130 
51. Finally, considering that the criteria for referral to VETC facilities are in large measure 
based on forms of ethnic, religious and cultural identity and expression, there is a  significant 
concern that deprivations of liberty in VETC facilities  are applied discriminatorily , which 
compounds the arbitrary character of detention in the centres .131 
52. The Government has not released official data about the number of individuals who 
have undergone re -education in VETCs . In 2018, the UN Committee on the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination noted that “estimates of the number of people detained range from tens of thousands to over a million”, and called on the Government  to provide statistics for  the 
  
 121 OHCHR interview.  
 122 OHCHR interviews.  
 123 OHCHR interviews.  
 124 OHCHR interviews.  
 125 Articles 38 and 39, XIM (after 2018 amendment) (unofficial translation).  
 126 Application of International  Labour Standards 2022 Report III (Part A) Report of the Committee of 
Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations International Labour Conference 
110th Session, 2022, p. 689.  
 127 Ibid, p.  520. 
 128 OHCHR interviews.  
129 See explanations in par a. 29 (referrals to VETCs are administrative measures) and para. 42  (referrals 
are involuntary ).  
 130 Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Question of the human rights of all persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment ( E/CN.4/ 1993/24), 12 January 1993, p. 20.  
 
131 See Report of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, A/HRC/36/37, 19 July 2017, para. 48.  17 
 past five years.132 In response, the Government asserted that it was not possible to state the 
number of those taking part in education and training, because it “is dynamic, as people are 
continuously coming and going,”133 a position it has maintained since.  
53. Various official Government documents and statements , however,  give indication as 
to the scale of the program me. The 2019 White Paper on “ Vocational Training and Education 
in Xinjiang ” suggests that it was  intended not just for isolated cases , but for “many people”.134 
Moreover, some Government documents and statements, predating 2017,  provide insight  into 
the authorities ’ perception of the “extremist” threat in XUAR and corresponding needs for 
“education”, which further suggest the potential of impacting  significant proportions of the 
relevant population  in XUAR .135 Additionally, Government documents that are in the public 
domain and appear credible refer not only to the existence of VETC  facilitie s across the 
geographic span of XUAR, but indicate  a large- scale bureaucracy and methodology is in 
place for their operation and implementation.136 Available satellite imagery from public 
sources similarly provide indications of many structures with security features such as high 
walls, watch towers, and barbed -wired external and internal fencing , which appear to have 
been established  or expanded  across XUAR, since 2016, co ncurrent  with the “Strike Hard” 
campaign .137 
54. Individuals with direct knowledge and personal experience of detention in VETC 
facilities told OHCHR that they had been held alongside many others and that they personally knew numerous other relatives and friends placed in VETC  facilitie s. As one person 
described it, “every neighbour had someone in the camps or ‘taken to study’, as they call it.”
138 Individuals interviewed by OHCHR were held in VETC  facilitie s in at least eight 
different geographic locations spread across XUAR . 
55. In the absence of official ly available  data, other researchers  have drawn on a 
combination of sources  and data points to assess and estimate the extent of the affected 
population.  These includ e documents that appear to be official, tender notices , and satellite 
imagery , shedding light on the scale of deten tion in VETC facilities .139 Some analysis is also 
based on documents that appear to provide information about the detention status of residents 
from various prefectures and counties in XUAR. Based on the methodology employed,  it has 
been estimated that around 10 -20 per cent of the adult “ethnic population” in these  counties 
and townships  were subjected to some form of detention between 2017 and 2018.140  
  
 132 Concluding Observations of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the 
combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic reports of China (including Hong Kong, China and 
Macao, China), CERD/C/CHN/CO/14 -17, para . 40(a), 42 (h), 19 Sept. 2018.  
 133 Information received from China on follow -up to the concluding observations on its combined 
fourteenth to sevente enth periodic reports , 9 October 2019, CERD/C/CHN/FCO/14 -17, p.3.  
 134 The relevant extract of the White Paper states that in XUAR “ many  people have engaged in – or have 
been instigated, coerced or enticed to engage in – terrorist and extremist activities, but they have not 
committed serious crimes or inflicted actual harm” (emphasis added).  
 135 See, for example, in early 2015, the party secretary of the XUAR Justice Department, Zhang Yun, 
telling Chinese news outlet Phoenix News that in a typical village in XUAR, 30 per cent of 
individuals affected by religious extremism require “re-education”.  
 136 See, for example, the “Xinjiang papers”, the “China cables” and the “Xinjiang Police Files”.  
 137 See Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) “The Xinjiang Data Project”; see also, “China recently built a vast new infrastructure to imprison Muslims”, Buzzfeed news, M. Rajagopalan, A. 
Killings, C. Bushek, 27 August 2020. See also “Facilities report”, The Xinjiang Victims Database. 
The Government has disputed the authenticity of the images by ASPI, see Global Times, “Anti -China 
Australian think tank’s malicious lies cannot escape justice: Chinese FM”, 15 October 2020. See also Global Times “Xinjiang offers real -site photos to debunk satellite images ‘evidence’ of ‘detention 
centres’”, 27 November 2020 , and responses by ASPI, see South China Morning Post, “ Australian 
researcher hits back at Chinese tabloid over Xinjiang report”, 30 November 2020, and N . Ruser on 
Twitter.  
 
138 OHCHR interview.  
 139 See for example, research by S . Zhang, https://medium.com/@shawnwzhang and “Detention 
Facilities in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region”, Xinjiang Victims Database.  
 140 See "Thoroughly Reforming them Toward a Healthy Heart Attitude" - China's Political Re -Education 
Campaign in Xinjiang , A. Zenz, 15 May 2018. See “Wash Brains, Cleanse Hearts”: Evidence from 
 18 56. On the basis of  the information currently before it, OHCHR is not in a position to 
confirm estimates of total numbers of individuals affected by the VETC system. 
Cumulatively,  however,  these different sources of information support a  conclusion that the 
system of VETC fa cilities was intended and operated on a wide scale spanning the geographic 
entirety of the region . In the absence of plausible  information indicating the contrary, and 
while a specific number of detainees in VETC  facilitie s cannot be confirmed, reasonable 
conclusion can be drawn from the available information that the number of individuals in the 
VETCs, at least between 2017 and 2019, was very significant , comprising a substantial 
proportion of the Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim minority populations.  
57. In summary, based on the information reviewed, it is reasonable to conclude that a 
pattern of large -scale arbitrary detention occurred in VETC facilities, at least during 2017 to 
2019, affecting a significant proportion of the Uyghur and other predominant ly Muslim 
ethnic minority community in XUAR. The Government has indicated that VETC facilities are now closed and that all “trainees have graduated”,
141 thereby suggesting that these 
facilities may no longer be in use. OHCHR is not in a position to confirm this, which is primarily due to the lack of relevant official or other information since the end of 2019 and access for on -the-ground verification. Regardless, considerable concerns remain, most 
notably due to the fact that the legal and policy framework that underpins the operation of the VETC system remains in place and, to the extent not currently employed, could be re-engaged at any point.  
 B. Detention through the criminal justice system  
58. Alongside the mass referral of individuals to VETC  facilitie s, there appears to have 
been a marked increase in criminal arrests , convictions, and imposition of lengthy prison 
sentences in XUAR .  
59. Government information indicate s an increase in criminal cases in  2018, amounting 
to a 25.1 per cent increase over the average amount in the preceding five years . Similarly, in 
2019, the figure was 19. 2 per cent higher than the average of the preceding five years.
142 
OHCHR notes that China has in general a 99.9 per cent conviction rate in criminal cases.143 
The Government ha s stated  that in many counties the proportion of defendants of ethnic 
minorities in criminal convictions is lower than the proportion of ethnic minorities in the total population of that region, without  providing  disaggregated data for the proportion of et hnic 
minorities convicted for terrorism or state security related crimes.  
  
Chinese Government Documents about the Nature and Extent of Xinjiang’s Extrajudicial Internment 
Campaign, A. Zenz, Journal of Political Risk, Vol. 7, No. 11, November 2019,  24 November 2019 . 
See also, “More than 890,000 inmates in Uyghur concentration camps”, Newsweek Japan, 13 March 
2018. According to the “Xinjiang Police Files”, internal spreadsheets from Konasheher show the 
personal information of approx. 286,000 individuals (almost the entire county population in 2018), 
indicating that approx. 12.3 to 12.7 per cent of the county’s ethnic adults were allegedly in some form 
of detention in 2018.  
 141 Supra, footnote 88 . 
142 According to Government information, in 2018, Xinjiang's courts accepted 74,300 cases, an increase 
of 25.1 per cent over the average amount in the previous five years. In 2019, the courts accepted 70,800 cases, an increase of 19.2 per cent over the average amount in the previous five years. These 
figures differ from those contained in the Xinjiang Procuratorate reports, which places the number of 
prosecutions at 135,546 for 2018. The Government has stated that some regions in XUAR saw various fluctuations in criminal cases. For example, in the Aksu region, local courts of the two levels 
in the region reportedly accepted 3,202 cases in 2014 and 5,081 cases in 2015, an increase of 58.7 per 
cent. In 2016, the number of cases reportedly decreased by 134.8 per cent to 2,164 c ases. In 2017, the 
number of cases increased 100.3 per cent to 4,335. In 2018, the courts accepted 5,644 cases, an 
increase of 30.6 per cent from the previous year.  
 
143 In 2020, the acquittal rate was 0,0681 per cent, see Report on the W ork of the Supreme People’s 
Court, Fourth Session of the 13th National People's Congress on March 8, 2021, 
https://www.court.gov.cn/ zixun -xiangqing -290831.html . In 2019, the acquittal rate was 0,0836 per 
cent, see Report on the  work of the Supreme People's Court , at the 13th National People's Congress at 
the third session of the Congress, 25 May 2020,  https://www.court.gov.cn/zixun -xiangqing -
231301.html . 19 
 60.  The Government has stated that  between 2013 and 2017, the XUAR courts completed 
297,000 criminal cases.144 Based on official statistics, it would appear that the bulk of these  
cases were completed in 2017.145 According to the Government’s information, the number of 
detainees in public security agencies in XUAR increased by 35 per cent in 2017 and by about 
eight  per cent in 2018 year on year.  
61. Another change in 2017  was the increase in the number of people given sentences of 
five years or longer. Prior to 2017, approximately 10.8 per cent of the total number of people 
sentenced in XUAR received sentences of over five years. In 2017, that figure rose to 87 per cent of  the sentences . According to official Government statistics, d uring 2017 alone, XUAR 
courts sentenced 86,655 defendants,  or 10 times more  than in the previous year, to prison 
terms of five years or longer,
146 although  again  it is not possible to disaggregate the number 
charged and convicted for terrorism or “extremism” -related offences.  
62. Data remains incomplete and s imilar data for 2020 and beyond has not been made 
available .147 This makes it difficult to consider  these statistics in the context of a longer 
timeframe, determining whether it may have been a spike or part of a larger trend, and whether increased convictions disproportionally affect  specific groups of the population. 
However, even if the spike in 2017 -2018 was short term, it necessarily i mplies a significantly 
increased prison population in Xinjiang persist ing today as sentences continue to be served.  
In a statement of April 2021, the Government confi rmed that almost  one-third of 10,708 
entries in the  “Xinjiang Data Project”, “ Xinjiang Victims Database ” and “Uyghur 
Transitional Ju stice Database”, civil society -run platform s used primarily by family members 
seeking information on the whereabouts of loved ones in XUAR, pertain to criminal convicts 
serving sentences  “for crimes of violent terrorism and criminal offences”.148 
63. Furthermore, the new construction or expansion of buildings, with high security 
features,  especially after 2019,  visible through public source satellite imagery  (Google 
Earth), appears to suggest an increase in detention facilities being established likely to 
accommodate corresponding increases in detainees, both pre -trial and following convict ion. 
At the same time, existing prisons have been expanded in numerous locations. By way of illustrative example, the Urum qi No.3 Detention Centre in Dabancheng has increased 
considerably in size from 2018 to 2020, with the number of buildings on the compound increased from 40 in 2018 to 68 in 2019 and 92 in 2020.
149  
 
  
144 This figure differs from data contained in the Report on the Work of the People’s Procuratorate of the 
People’s Republic of China, 13th session of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, 23 January 
2018, which places the figure at 330,918 people arrested and 362,872 prosecuted for various criminal offences from 2 013 to 2017.  
145 See annual Procuratorate reports of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.  
 146 In 2016, 8,136 persons were sentenced to more than five years of imprisonment, life imprisonment 
and the death penalty. 22,459 persons were sentenced to imprisonment for less than five years. Total 
is 30,595. In 2017, 86,655 persons were sentenced to more than five years' imprisonment, life  
imprisonment and death penalty, 12,671 persons were sentenced to less than five years. Total is 
99,326. Sources are on file wit h OHCHR (Procuratorate reports for XUAR).  
 147 This information was requested from the Government of China in March 2021, which has not 
responded to date.  
 148 The seventh press conference by Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region on Xinjiang-related issues in Beijing, 9 April 2021. See transcript on the website of the Chinese Embassy in the United States: 
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/ceus//eng/zt/wonderfulxj/xinjiangpressconference/7thpress/t1894724.htm.  
 
149 This aligns with other information that appears to be of an official nature, namely the speech of 
Minister for Public Security, Zhao Kezhi , of June 2018, in which he reportedly stated that “Last year, 
the Ministry of Justice selected 1,500 police officers from across the country in two batches to 
support Xinjiang’s  prisons. This year, the third batch of 1,000 officers has entered Xinjiang, in order 
to alleviate the serious problem of excess detentions (relative to capacity) in the prisons of the 
Autonomous Region. ..” “In terms of expanding investment, the National D evelopment and Reform 
Commission supports 27 projects for expanding (existing) prisons and one new prison construction project in the Autonomous Region, with a total investment of 2.27 billion yuan. After all projects are completed by the end of this year,  the prisons capacity of the Autonomous Region and the Corps will 
increase by 57,300 people……” See the “Xinjiang Police Files” (unofficial translation).  20  
22 April 2018  (image available on Google E arth)  
 
 
19 March 2020  (image available on Google E arth)  
64. OHCHR examined a cross- sample of available judicial decisions in cases alleging 
terrorism or “extremism” with respect to defendants from ethnic communities in XUAR in 
the period 2014 -2019. The number of publicly  available and relevant court decisions is 
limited and may not necessarily be representative of the totality of judicial practice , but those 
that are available provide important insight s into the way the  judiciary has interpreted  acts of 
religious “extremism”.150 These include relatively minor infractions apparently punished 
severely; judgments referring to conduct being “extremist” despite none of the formal charges being related to terrorism or “extremism”; courts labelling acts as “extremist” without explaining how they fulfilled the applicable legal definition (s); the apparent targeting of 
underlying religious behaviour rather than the actual act for which the person is being prosecuted; and indications of an approach that considers any type of violation of law 
committed by a Muslim person as presumptively “extremist”.  
65. OHCHR also reviewed numerous report ing and data documenting the arrest and 
imprisonment, often on lengthy custodial sentences, of prominent scholars, artists and intellectuals from the Uyghu r community , including during the “Strike Hard” period . Several 
such cases have been taken up by UN human rights mechanisms.
151 Beyond the general 
  
 150 On 9 March 2021, OHCHR requested information from the Government on jurisprudence from 
Chinese courts and decisions of administrative bodies implementing anti -terrorism and anti -
“extremism” policies. No response was received. The samples of publicly available decisions and 
jurisprudence are further complemented by documents that appear to be of an official nature and that 
indicate similarly that religious behaviour, such as reading scriptures to others, or growing a beard, 
can attract long criminal sentences, often under article 293 of China’s Penal Code (picking quarrels), see, e.g., the “Xinjiang Police  Files”.
 
 151 See, e.g., Special Procedures’ joint press release: https://www.ohchr.org/en/press -
releases/2019/12/china -urged-disclose -location -uyghur -academic-tashpolat -tiyip , 26 December 2019; 
and Special Procedures joint communication, AL CHN 4/2021, 28 April 2021. See also Opinion of 
the Working Group on Arbitrary De tention  A/HRC/WGAD/2014/3, 21 July 2014.  
21 
 human rights concerns already identified, criminal prosecution and detention of such 
individuals has a broader deleterious effect on the life of their community .  
66. This information is complemented by first -hand accounts gathered by OHCHR from 
overseas family members of Uyghurs and Kazakhs who are serving l engthy custodial 
sentences for alleged terrorism and “extremism” related offences. Their accounts provide further insight into how religious behaviour and/or perceived “terrorist” activit ies, such as 
travelling abroad or sending funds overseas, have been heavily criminalised and punished in 
XUAR.
152  
67. While a specific determination of the extent to which the dramatic increase in 
incarceration rates over recent years has resulted in arbitrary  detention is not possible based 
on the information available at this stage, the information reviewed by OHCHR raises  wider 
concern s. This is in the context of  how a criminal justice system , marked by overly broad and 
vague definitions of crimes ,153 limits on due process rights and lack of judicial independence, 
may be leading to broader patterns of arbitrary deprivation of liberty in the context of the 
criminal justice system .154 
68. In summary, t he trend of increased number and length of imprisonments through the 
criminal justice system in XUAR strongly suggests there has been a shift towards formal 
incarcerations as the principal means for  large -scale imprisonment and deprivation of liberty . 
This is  of particular concern given the vague and capacious definitions of terrorism, 
“extremism” and public security related offences under domestic criminal law, that may lead 
to criminal prosecutions and the imposition of lengthy custodial sentences, including  for 
minor offences or for engaging in conduct protected by international human rights law.  
 V. Conditions and treatment in “Vocational Education and Training 
Centres ” 
69. Repeated claims raised of  adverse conditions and harsh treatment of detainees by the 
authorities in th e VETC fa cilities  have been raised . The Government has denied such 
allegations , asserting in its 2019 White Paper on “ Vocational Training and Education in 
Xinjiang ” that the rights of “trainees” are fully respected . 
70. Former detainees  interviewed  by OHCHR had spent periods of time , generally 
ranging from two months to  18 months , in facilitie s in eight different geographic  locations 
across XUAR , including in Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture , Aksu, Bayingol, Hotan, 
Karamay and Urumqi prefec tures .155 Two-thirds of  the twenty -six former detainees 
interviewed, reported having been subject ed to treatment that  would amount to torture and/or 
other forms of ill -treatment , either  in VETC  facilitie s themselves or in the context of 
process es of referral to VETC  facilitie s. The se claims of mistreatment took place either  
  
 152 OHCHR interviews.  
 153 It must be recalled that in addition to the overly broad and vague terrorist and “extremist” offences 
discussed above, Chinese criminal law is replete with other wide-ranging and imprecise pu blic 
security offences. Examples include inciting ethnic hatred or discrimination “if the circumstances are serious” (Article 249, CL, 2021 version), gathering a crowd that disturbs “social order” (Article 290, CL 2021 version), or “picking quarrels and ca using trouble” (Article 293, CL, 2021 version) 
(unofficial translations). These can be easily used to punish minor acts or legitimate forms of dissent. 
See also UN Committee against Torture, 3 February 2015, CAT/C/CHN/CO/5 para. 36.  
 
154 UN human rights mech anisms have been critical of the independence of the judiciary in practice. See, 
e.g., Concluding Observations by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
(CESCR) on the second periodic report of China, para. 10, 13 June 2014;  and Concluding 
Observations by the Committee against Torture (CAT), para. 22- 23d, 3 February 2015, 
CAT/C/CHN/CO/5.  
155 In line with its standard methodology, in cases of torture or sexual and gender -based violence, 
OHCHR has predominantly relied on its first -hand victim and eyewitness statements when assessed 
as credible and in line with other known information. Additionally, OHCHR also reviewed dozens of 
publicly available victim and witness accounts to understand the nature of the allegations being made and their genera l context. However, OHCHR findings on this matter are based on its own interviews 
and its contextual analysis of applicable laws, policy statements and other open-source documents.  22 during interrogations156 or as a form of punishment for (alleged) wrongdoing.157 Their 
accounts included being beaten with batons, including electric batons while strapped in a so-
called “tiger chair”;158 being subjected to interrogation with water being poured in their faces; 
prolonged solitary confinement; and being forced to sit motionless on small stools for prolonged periods of time. Persons reporting beatings for confessions described being taken 
to interrogation rooms that were separate to the cells  or dormitor y spaces where people were 
staying. Over two- thirds of the individuals  also reported that, prior to their transfer to a VETC  
facility , they were held in police stations , where they described  similar  instances  of being 
beaten while also immobilised in a “tiger chair” in those facilities.
159  
71. Forms of harsh treatment beyond those related to interrogations and punishment  were 
also reported . Several interviewees described being shackled during parts of their period of 
confinement in VETC  facilitie s.160 A consistent theme was description of constant hunger 
and, consequentl y, significant to severe weight loss during their periods in the facilities.161 
They also spoke about constant surveillance and the lights in the dorms/cells being switched on throughout the night, depriving them of sleep.
162 Interviewees described how people in 
the dorms/cells would have to take two- hour nightshifts to ensure cellmates were not praying 
or otherwise breaking rules at night -time.163 Some also noted that they were not allowed to 
speak their own language ( whether Uyghur or Kazakh) and could not practice their religion, 
such as pray, which they experienced as a further hardship.164 This was further exacerbated 
by the “political teachings”, consisting of having to learn and memorise so- called “red songs” 
and other off icial Party material. Interviewees consistently referred to this as an omnipresent 
aspect of their time in the VETC  facilitie s,165 with o ne interviewee describ ing their 
experience  as follows : “We were forced to sing patriotic song after patriotic song every  day, 
as loud as possible and until it hurts, until our faces become red and our veins appeared on our face.”
166 
  
 156 OHCHR interviews.  
 157 OHCHR interviews.  
158 “Tiger chairs” are generally device s whereby an individual is strapped to a chair by their hands and 
feet. This is often accompanied by beatings or other forms of torture. See UN Committee against 
Torture concerns on the use of the “interrogation chairs” in Concluding Observations on China, 3 
February 2016, CAT/C/CHN/CO/5, para. 26:  “In this regard, the Committee expresses concern at the 
State party’s explanation that the use of the so-called “interrogation chair” is justified “as a protective measure to prevent suspects from escaping, committing self -injury or attacking personnel”, 
which is highly improbable during an interrogation.” The use of “tiger chairs” in VETCs was further 
detailed by the “Xinjiang Police Files”, including a number of internal instructions for the VETCs 
referring to: (i) police guards being armed; (ii) correct ive measures and punishment of those 
responsible for attempting to escape, including shoot to kill orders (iii) Individuals seeking medical 
treatment are to be made to wear restraining equipment [i.e. cuffs, shackles] (iv) handcuffs, shackles 
and hoods to be worn by trainees during transfers; (v) all trainees are interrogated upon registration and undergo a medical examination. These police protocols are further accompanied by photographs 
that show the internal workings of the centres, where detainees are seen wearing shackles and hoods 
alongside armed police guards.  
 
159 OHCHR interviews.  OHCHR also received certain allegations of  suspicious deaths occurring in 
custody in the context of VETCs as well as other detention facilities. However, these have not been possible to verify to the requisite standard. OHCHR recalls that the UN treaty bodies have also expressed concerns with resp ect to reports of torture, ill -treatment and deaths in custody of certain 
ethnic minorities, including Uyghurs. See UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, Concluding Observations on China, CERD/C/CHN/CO/14 -17, 19 September 2018, 
paras. 3 8 and 39.  
 
160 OHCHR interviews.  
 161 OHCHR interviews.  
 162 OHCHR interviews.  
 163 OHCHR interviews.  
 164 The 2019 White Paper on Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang explicitly states that “ The 
centers practice separation of education and religion in management, which means trainees should not 
organize or take part in religious activities there, but they can decide on their own whether to do so on 
a legal basis when they get home.” 
 165 OHCHR interviews.  
 166 OHCHR interview.  23 
 72. Almost all interviewees described either injections, pills or both being administered 
regularly, as well as blood samples being regularly collec ted in the VETC  facilitie s. 
Interviewees were consistent in their descriptions of how the administered medicine s made 
them feel drowsy. One interviewee, for example,  described the process as follows: “We 
received one tablet a day. It looked like aspirin. We were lined up and someone with gloves 
systematically checked our mouths to make sure we swallowed it”.167 While the frequency 
of the se medical interventions and treatments varied according to interviewees, both 
injections and the administration of what were described as “white pills” occurred at the 
beginning of their placement and throughout their time in the VETCs. None of the interviewees were properly informed about these medical treatments, nor did they feel they were in a position to refuse  them . In such circumstances informed consent cannot be inferred.  
73. Some  also spoke of various forms of sexual violence, including some instances of 
rape, affecting mainly women. These accounts included having been forced by guards to perform oral sex in the context of an interrogation and various forms of sexual humiliation, including forced nudity. The accounts similarly described the way in which rapes took place 
outside the dormitories, in separate rooms without cameras. In addition, several women 
recoun ted being subject to invasive gynaecological examinations, including one woman who 
described this taking place in a group setting which “made old women ashamed and young girls cry” ,
168 because they did not understand what was happening.  The Government has 
firmly denied these claims, often through personal or gendered attacks against the women 
who have publicly reported these allegations.169 
74. A number of interviewees stated that they suffer ed from persistent health conditions 
as a result of the harsh conditions  and treatment they reported experiencing in the facilities.170 
Some of the interviewees also described their stay in the facilities as a “psychological 
torture” , due to the uncertainty about the reasons for their detention, the length of their stay, 
their conditions, the constant atmosphere of fear and lack of contact with the outside world, 
especially their families, and the stress and anxiety associated with the constant surveillance. As one interviewee stated, “the worst thing was that you never knew whe n you would be let 
out”.
171 Many of the interviewees reported long- term psychological consequences from their 
periods of confinement at VETC  facilitie s, including feelings of trauma.  
75. Consistent first-hand accounts regarding the conditions and treatment of detainees in 
VETCs reveal ed multiple serious human rights concerns. Firstly, they point ed to violations 
of the fundamental obligation to treat individuals deprived of their liberty humanely and with dignity
172 and of the absolute prohibition of  torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment.173 Additionally, the cumulative conditions and 
treatments that characterized  their daily life in the VETC  facilities constitute d violations of 
  
 167 OHCHR interview.  
 168 OHCHR interview.  
 169 See, e.g., Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Wang Wenbin's Regular Press Conference on February 23, 2021; See also Global 
Times “So -called Xinjiang detainees lie on “victims” stories about training centers: regional 
Government”, 3 December 2019;  See also BBC “The cost of speaking up against China”, J. Gunter, 
31 March 2021 and Reuters “China counters Uighur criticism with explicit attacks on women 
witnesses”, C. Cadell, 1 March 2021.  
 170 OHCHR interviews.  
 171 OHCHR interview.  
 172 Article 10, ICCPR. The UN Human Rights Committee has described this right as expressing “a norm 
of general international law not subject to derogation”. See UN Human Rights Committee, General 
Comment No. 29 (CCPR/ C/21/Rev.1/Add.11), para. 13a. See also the revised UN Standard Minimum 
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Nelson Mandela Rules), as adopted by the UN General 
Assembly in its resolution A/RES/70/175 (17 December 2015).  
 173 China is a party to the Convent ion against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment 
or Punishment. See also Article 5, UDHR and Article 7, ICCPR. The prohibition of torture is 
considered a norm of customary international law, as well as a peremptory norm of international law 
from which no derogations are permitted.  24 the basic standards for the humane treatment of detainees.174 Such conditions, especially 
when experienced over extended periods or in recurring forms, may also result in physical 
and mental suffering that is severe enough to amount to torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .
  
76. There are also  concerns regarding the right to health for persons deprived of liberty in 
VETCs . Every human being is entitled to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of 
physical and mental health ,175 including individua ls who are deprived of their liberty. This 
includes the right to control one’s health and body and the right to be free from interference, such as the right to be free from torture and non- consensual medical treatment.
176 
Guaranteeing informed consent is fundamental to achieving the enjoyment of the right to health through practices, policies and research that respect individual autonomy, self -
determination and human dignity.
177 The right to health also extends to the underlying 
determinants of health, such as access to safe and potable water and adequate sanitation, and an adequate supply of safe food and nutrition, among others .
178 
77. Additionally , there is a serious concern regard ing the Government’s response to 
allegations of human rights violations in the context of the VETCs, and the apparent lack of 
redress mechanisms. Even if some laws provide in principle for sanctions of officials who abuse their power or fail to perform the ir duties , OHCHR is not aware of any individual 
instances of imposition of such sanctions.  Similarly, the Government’s policy framework 
does not refer to any independent oversight mechanism for the operation of the VETC  
facilitie s that might conduct inspec tions or through which concerned individuals could appeal 
the decision to compel them to attend the VETC programme or to investigate complaints of 
alleged human rights violations throughout the process.
179 While a small  number of first -hand 
accounts made  reference to some form of outside visits  by officials  that took place at times 
in VETC  faciliti es, their descriptions do not indicate that these were organized in a manner 
that were conducive for individuals to report ab uses.180 These circumstances, in sum, raise 
serious doubt as to the availability, in practice, of effective remedies against violations of 
detainees’ rights, and the concerns expressed in 2016 by the UN Committee against Torture urging China to “establish a n independent oversight mechanism to ensure prompt, impartial 
and effective investigation into all allegations of torture and ill- treatment” remain valid.
181 
  
 174 Examples include overcrowded cells or dorms, unsanitary conditions, deprivation of sleep, lack of 
privacy, sexual intimidation or humiliation, insufficient food, inadequate health care, prolonged stress 
positions, inability to communicate with family, inability to use native language and practice one’s 
religion, uncertainty about release date, non -consensual medical treatment, political re-education, and 
living under constant threat of violence.  
 175 Article 12 , ICESCR.  
 176 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14 (E/C.12/2000/4), 
para. 8. Moreover, the UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment has argued that “medical treatm ents of an intrusive and irreversible nature, 
when lacking a therapeutic purpose, may constitute torture or ill -treatment when enforced or 
administered without the free and informed consent of the person concerned”, see Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 
A/HRC/22/53, para. 32.  
 
177 See report of the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, A/64/272.  
 
178 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 14,  E/C.12/2000/4, 
para. 11.  
 179 Article 62 of the XIM (version after 2018 amendment), for example, provides that staff of counter -
terrorism institutions and relevant departments who “ fail to perform their duties in counter -terrorism 
work” may be reprimanded and educated, given administrative sanctions where the circumstances are serious, and held criminally responsible where a crime was committed (unofficial translation). Article 
94 of  the CTL, in turn, sanctions the abuse of power of personnel of counter -terrorism institutions and 
“other conduct violating laws or discipline”, providing that “all units and individuals have the right to 
report it or make an accusation to the competent de partment” (unofficial translation).  
 
180 OHCHR interviews.  
 181 UN Committee against Torture, Concluding Observations on the 5th periodic report by China, 3 
February 2016, CAT/C/CHN/CO/5, para. 23.  25 
 78. In conclusion, descriptions  of de tentions in the VETCs in the period between 2017 
and 2019 gathered  by OHCHR were marked by pattern s of torture or other forms of cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, other violations of the right of persons 
deprived of their liberty to be treated humanely and with dignity, as well as violations of the right to health . Allegations were also made of instances of sexual and gender -based violence 
(SGBV) in VETC  facilitie s, including of rape, which also appear credible and would in 
themselves amount to acts of torture or other forms of ill -treatment. Based on c urrently 
available information, it is not possible to draw wider conclusions as to the extent to which 
there may have been broader pattern s of SGBV in VETC  facilitie s. The Government’s 
blanket denials of all allegations, as well as its gendered and humiliating attacks on those 
who have come forward to share their experiences, and have added to the indignity and suffering of survivors.  
 VI. Other human rights concerns  
79. Additional a llegations of broader negative impact s of the “ Strike Hard ” campaign and 
associated policies in XUAR on the human rights of persons belonging to ethnic communities  
have arisen , beyond the aspects of large -scale deprivation of liberty of certain  categories of 
individuals  already described in this assessment . Claims have been made, specifically  in 
terms of undue restrictions on cultural, linguistic, and religious identity and expression; rights to privacy and movement; reproductive rights; as well  as with respect to employment and 
labour rights . Many of these reflect broader trends in ethnic minority regions that have been 
highlighted by UN human rights mechanisms over many years. These are discussed in turn below.   
 A. Religious , cultural  and linguistic  identity and expression  
80. The right of members belonging to minorities to be protected from discrimination is 
enshrined in China’s Constitution and in the Regional Ethnic Autonomy Law,
182 and has 
been reiterated in numerous official policy documents  featuring equality, unity, regional 
ethnic autonomy, and common prosperity for all ethnic groups.183 The Government has 
consistently denied allegations of any discrimination against the Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim minorities in XUAR , and highli ghts the representation of ethnic 
minorities in regional government and the National People’s Congress . Numerous U N human 
rights mechanisms , however , have expressed concerns about restrictions on cultural rights 
and the rights to freedom of religion and expression in ethnic minority regions, including XUAR , over past years.
184 
81. In the context of implementation of the Government ’s purported counter -terrorism 
and counter -“extremism” strategies , these concerns have assumed sharper focus through 
progressively tighter regulation of religious practice.   
82. Freedom of religion and “normal religious activities” are protected in China’s 
Constitution,185 and the Government cites that more than 20 million people follow Islam in 
provinces and regions throughout China. However, laws and other legal texts applicable in China generally and in XUAR  specifically  regulate religion in a detailed, intrusive and 
particularly controlling manner. Religious activities are allowed only in Government -
  
 182 Article 4, Constitution of the People’s Republic of China; Article 9 of the Regional Ethnic Autonomy 
Law.  
 183 See, e.g., White Paper “Respecting and Protecting the Rights of All Ethnic Groups in Xinjiang” 
issued on 14 July 2021 by China’s State Council Information Office.  
 184 See, e.g., Concluding Observations by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
E/C.12/CHN/CO/2, 13 June 2014, para. 36; Concluding Observations by the Committee on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women , CEDAW/C/CHN/CO/7 -8, 14 November 
2014, paras. 35(b), 47; Concluding Observations on the combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic 
reports of China (including Hong Kong, China and Macao, China), CERD/C/CHN/CO/14- 17, paras, 
40(b), 40(c), 41(e), 41(f) , 19 September 2018. See also various communications by the Special 
Rapporteur on minority issues, Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion and belief, and other 
special procedures: CHN 1/2018; CHN 21/2018; CHN 18/2019.  
 185 Article 36, Constitution of the People’s Republic of China.  26 approved locations, conducted by Government -accredited personnel, and on the basis of 
Government -approved teachings and publications.186 Religious activity is strictly prohibited 
in “state institutions, schools of national education, public institutions and other places”.187 
Child ren are not allowed to participate in religious activities. 188 The Government, however, 
indicated that it advocates a form of “Islam with Chinese characteristics” which adheres to 
core beliefs but is better adapted to Chinese society and can play a positiv e role in China’s 
economic and social development.   
83. The “Strike Hard ” campaign has led to the adoption or amendment of various legal 
instruments to further tighten the regulation of religion,  that resulted in the regulation of 
religion, including  the obligation of “any organization or individual [to] consciously resist 
religious extremism and illegal religious activities”.189 As highlighted above, “extremism” is 
defined broadly, while  the legal  instruments include a list of “primary expressions of 
extre mism”190 that have in practice been accompanied by lists of “signs” 191 of “religious 
extremism” to assist officials and the general public in identifying “extremist” behaviour in 
the community.192 These “expressions” and “signs” include conduct that may in t he 
circumstances be of legitimate concern , such as “inciting ‘Jihad’, advocating and carrying 
out violent terrorist activities”,193 but range far more widely, encompassing an exceptionally  
broad range of acts that in themselves constitute exercise of protec ted fundamental freedoms 
connected to  the enjoyment of cultural and religious life  by these communities . These include 
wearing hijabs and “abnormal” beards; expanding the scope of “Halal”; closing restaurants during Ramadan; participating in cross -county r eligious activities “without valid reason”; 
using V irtual Private Network s (VPNs) , social media and Internet to teach scriptures and 
preach; and giving one’s child a Muslim name .
194 They also include various forms of dissent 
and breaches of other laws and policies , including those relating to family planning , as signs 
of “extremism”.  
84. Such exceptionally broad interpretations of “extremism”, often explicitly targeting 
standard tenets of Islamic religion and practice, in effect renders virtually all such conduct in 
potential breach of the regulation of religion and of broader Government policies within the 
ambit of “counter -extremism” policies, with attendant risks of either criminal sanction and/or 
re-education. An environment is thus created in which rel igious or cultural practice or 
expression is conflated with “extremism”  and can lead to serious consequences  for persons 
so identified .195  
85. Alongside the increasing restrictions on expressions of Muslim religious practice are 
recurring re ports of the destruction of Islamic religious sites, such as mosques, shrines and 
cemeteries , especially during the “Strike Hard ” campaign period. According to the 
Government, 20,000 of the 35,000 mosques in the entire country are located in XUAR .196 
  
 186 See Xinjiang Religious Affairs Regulation (XRAR), amended in 2014; and the Religious Affairs 
Regulation (RAR), amended in 2017. See also State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 
White Paper on “Freedom of Religious Belief in Xinjiang ”, June 2016.  
 187 Article 31,  XRAR (unofficial translation).  
 188 Article 37, XRAR (unofficial translation).  
 189 Article 5.3, XRAR (unofficial translation).  
 190 Article 9, XRD (unofficial translation).  
 191 See Nanchang Public Security Bureau, “75 Religious Extremes”, 8 September 2015.  
 192 Global Times “Xinjiang counties identify 75 forms of religious extremism”, 25 December 2014.  
 193 Sign 4 on list of 75 signs of religious extremism (unofficial translation).  
 194 Article 9.8, XRD (“irregular name selection” as a prohibited sign of “extremism”). See also media reports with examples of names reportedly considered overly Islamic, such as Hajj, Jihadi, Mecca and 
Mohamed:
 Associated Press, “China bans list of Islamic names in restive Xinjiang region”, G. Shih, 
27 April 2017. OHCHR is not in a position to confirm these examples and the extent to which such 
policy is applied and enforced throughout XUAR.  
 195 Several of those interviewed by OHCHR spoke credibly of such tightening restrictions on freedom of 
religion in XUAR since 2015, including restrictions imposed on prayer, the keeping of Qurans and 
accessing of mosques.  
 196 However, there is no official data available with respect to the locations of these sites, which has 
made it more difficult to verify alleged patterns of destruction. See Global T imes, “ Xinjiang’s 
mosques have grown ten-fold” 3 March 2015 . This figure was reiterated by the P resident of the China 
 27 
 Nevertheless, several res earchers, predominantly based on detailed analysis of publicly  
available satellite imagery, consider that a large  number of mosques have been destroyed in 
XUAR over the last years.197 This trend has also been reported by investigative journalists 
who have visited the region and compared satellite images with the current physical 
conditions of the geographic sites  in question.198 The Government, for its part, has 
consistently denied alle gations of improper removal or destruction of religious sites, 
suggesting instead that mosques are in disrepair and being reconstructed for safety reasons and that basic burials and funeral customs are protected, while cemetery facilities have been improvi ng.
199 The Government has also stated that “people of different ethnic groups in some 
places have relocated graveyards of their own free will”.200 
86. Analysis of satellite imagery in the public domain indicates that  many religious sites 
appear to have been removed or changed in their characteristic identifying features , such as 
the removal of minarets. An illustrative example is the transformation of the Imam Asim Shrine, located in southern Xinjiang, north of the city of Hotan (see images below). This was formerly a pilgrimage site for Uyghurs and other Muslim communities that included the tomb of the Imam, a mosque, and several related tombs. Satellite imagery sourced from Google Earth , between December 2017 and June 2020 show s the shrine demolished and the grave 
marker, which used to be surrounded by pilgrims’ flags, erased.  
 
Imam Asim Shrine :
201 
Location: 37°14'28"N 80°3'6"E  March 2012: B uildings visible at shrine site  
 
 
 
  
Islamic Association: s ee Global Times, “Adapting Islam to local conditions  best course for 
development in Chinese society: head of Islamic association”, 8 February 2021.  
 197 See, e.g., Australian Strategic Policy Institute, “Cultural erasure, Tracing the destruction of Islamic 
spaces in Xinjiang”, 2020; “Are Historic Mosques in Xinjiang being Destroyed?” Bellingcat 
published research, 5 April 2019; “ Demolishing Faith: the Destruction and Desecratio n of Uyghur 
Mosques and Shrines ”, Uyghur Human Rights Project, 28 October 2019.  
 198 See, e.g., Reuters, “Mosques disappear as China strives to ‘build a beautiful Xinjiang’”, 23 May 2021 
and New York Times, “China is erasing mosques and precious shrines in X injiang”, 25 September 
2020.  
 199 According to the Government, “…venues that have fallen into disrepair, the government departments concerned, complying with the Law on Urban and Rural Planning and respecting the wishes of religious believers, have resolved potential safety hazards through reconstruction, relocation or 
expansion, thus ensuring the safe and orderly practice of religion” See White Paper, “Respecting and 
protecting the rights of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang”, State Council Information Office, 14 July 2021. See also, Xinhua, “Fact Check: Lies on Xinjiang -related issues versus the truth”, 5 February 2021.  
200 Xinhua, “Fact Check: Lies on Xinjiang -related issues versus the truth”, 5 February 2021.  
See also Global Times, “Xinjiang govt denies foreign media reports of 'tearing down mosques,' says it 
is reconstructing them for safety of Muslims”, 19 April 2021.  
 201 Evolution of site. All imagery copyright Maxar Technologies via Google Earth.  
28 December 2017: Buildings have been demolished before this date  
 
 
 
June 2020: Remnants of buildings are no longer visible  
 
 
 
87. While OHCHR is not able to reach firm conclusions at this stage regarding the extent 
of the destruction of religious sites, i n the absence of meaningful access to sites  and fuller 
information from the Government , these reports remain deeply concerning . 
88. Concerns have also been raised by UN human rights mechanisms regarding the 
respect for linguistic rights of ethnic minorities, which are in principle protected under 
Chinese law.202 For example, in 2014, in its periodic review of China, the UN Committee on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights expressed concern that ethnic minorities continue to face severe restrictions in the realization of their right to take part in cultural life, including the right to use and teach minority languages, history and culture, as well as to practis e their 
religion freely.
203 
89. Several Special Procedures mandate- holders, as well as the UN Committee on the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination in 2017 and 2018 respectively, raised concerns about a  
2017 directive from primarily Uyghur -populated Hotan county,204 which requested the 
  
 202 See Article 4, Constitution of the People’s Republic of China: “All ethnic groups shall have the 
freedom to use and develop their own spoken and written languages and to preserve or reform their 
own traditions and customs”, and Article 121, which states that government institutions in China’s 
autonomous regi ons “employ the spoken and written language or languages in common use in the 
locality.”  The Regional Ethnic Autonomy Law also includes guarantees for the freedom of ethnic 
groups to use and develop their own language. See for example, Article 37, which st ates that “schools 
(classes) and other educational organizations recruiting mostly ethnic minority students should, 
whenever possible, use textbooks in their own languages and use these languages as the media of instruction.”  
 
203 See CERD Concluding observa tions on the second periodic report of China, including Hong Kong, 
China, and Macao, China, E/C.12/CHN/CO/2, 13 June 2014, para. 36.  
 204 See Communication by the Special Rapporteurs, 12 January 2018, OL CHN1/2018 and CERD, 
Concluding observations, CERD/C/CH N/CO/14 -17, 19 September 2018, para. 40 (e).  
29 
 authorities to firmly implement teaching in the national common language (Mandarin 
Chinese) in the three years of pre -school and the first years of elementary and middle school, 
with a view to achieving full coverage by 2020. In addition, the directive prohi bits the use in 
the educational system of texts, slogans and pictures in the Uyghur language, as well as the 
use of the Uyghur language for collective activities, public activities and management work. In its responses, the Government reaffirmed its commit ment to bilingual education in XUAR , 
but did not question the authenticity of the directive nor clarify whether it remained in 
force.
205 Persons interviewed by OHCHR also recounted that, at least since 2014, there were 
closures of schools providing instruct ion in Uyghur and/or Kazakh language, and that 
teachers were being progressively removed from their bilingual duties .206  
90. According to the Government,  all primary and secondary schools have incorporated 
into their curriculum spoken and written languages of ethnic minority groups, on top of courses in standard spoken and written Chinese language.  Courses in ethnic minority 
languages are mandatory (locally) from 1
st to 8th grades, and optional in senior high schools.  
Textbooks are available in four ethnic mino rity languages.  An increasing number of students 
are studying ethnic languages, including Uyghur and Kazakh, at the undergraduate and postgraduate level.  
91. The restrictions described in this section pose significant concerns from an 
international human right s law perspective. International law specifically protects the right 
to freedom of religion or belief , a right exercised individually and collectively,
207 in its 
complementary components of hav ing a religion of one’s choice and in manifest ing it. The 
manifestation of religion includes worship, whether in forms of  religious prayer and 
preaching, display of symbols, or building of places of worship, as well as observance and practice, including  custom s such as observance of religious holidays marking important 
points in the religious calendar and dietary regulations, the wearing of distinctive clothing or 
use of a particular language, and teaching, encompassing freedom s to choose one’s own 
religious le aders, establish religious schools and prepare and distribute religious texts or 
publications.
208 International standards are clear that t he right to freedom of religion cannot 
be derogated from , even  in times of emergency .209 The right to choose one’s religion or 
belief, as well as the right to profess one’s religion privately, can also not be limited. Only 
the public manifestation of religion or belief may be subject to certain limitations, where they 
are prescribed by law and necessary and proportional to achieve a legitimate aim , such as to 
protect public safety, order, health and morals, or to protect fundamental rights and freedoms of others.
210 
92. The restrictions imposed on the exercise of freedom of religion with  respect to Islamic 
religious practice in X UAR  fall short of these standards. In terms of the legality requirement, 
while some restrictions are legally prescribed, others are a consequence of certain types of conduct being considered a “sign of extremism” in practice, even if the conduct as such ma y 
in fact not be unlawful , such as having a long beard or declining to us e a television . Further , 
an aim to combat and extinguish “religious extremism”, given its breadth and vagueness, cannot of itself be a legitimate aim under international human rights law . Finally , generalized 
restrictions on a wide range of manifestations of accepted religious tenets  cannot be 
characterised as necessary or proportional  to such an aim . 
  
 205 See Response by the Government on 15 March 2018 to the Special Rapporteurs Other Letter OL 
CHN 1/2018 of 12 January 2018.  See also Information received from China on follow -up to the 
concluding observations on its combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic reports, 5 February 2020, 
CERD/C/CHN/FCO/14 -17. 
 206 OHCHR interviews.  
 207 Article 18, UDHR; Article 5, CERD; Article 14, CRC; Article 18, ICCPR. See also the United 
Nations Declaratio n on the El imination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on 
Religion or Belief, as well as the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to 
National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities.  
 208 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 22, CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.4, paras. 4 and 8.  
 209 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 22, CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.4, para. 5.  
 210 Article 18(3), ICCPR.  30 93. International  law prohibits  discrimination , including that based on religious or ethnic 
identity,211 and protects minorities in the enjoyment of their culture, the professing of their 
religion and the use of their language.212 In as much as the Government’s laws and  policies , 
including in the context of the “Strike Hard ” campaign, specifically restrict and suppress 
practices that are part of the identity and cultural life of persons belonging to Uyghur and 
other predominantly Muslim minorities , they also raise concerns of discrimination against 
such minorities on prohibited grounds .  
 B. Rights to privacy and freedom of movement   
94. The enforcement of the Government’s counterterrorism and “extremism” policies are 
accompanied by allegations of extensive forms of intensive surveillance and control .  
95. As highlighted above, public security orga ns are given sweeping powers to prevent, 
investigate and respond to terrorist and “extremist” acts,213 including to employ 
“technological investigative measures” and to collect and retain data regarding several aspects of life, including personal biometric data.
214 The Criminal Procedure Law allows 
public security officials to use special investigative techniques , including electronic 
surveillance ,215 while the Counter -Terrorism Law allows them to impose a range of 
restrictive measures on suspects.216 
96. These bro ad legal powers provide legal underpinning for what has been alleged to be 
a sophisticated, large -scale and system atized surveillance system in practice, implemented 
across the entire region both online and offline. Available descriptions suggest that this  
system has been developed in partnership with private security and technology companies which supply the requisite technology, including for in- person and electronic monitoring in 
the form of biometric data collection, including iris scans and facial imag ery. Such 
monitoring has reportedly  been driven by an ever -present network of surveillance cameras , 
including deploying facial recognition  capabilities ; a vast network of “convenience police 
stations” and other checkpoints; and broad access to people’s personal communication devices and financial histor ies, coupled with analytical use of big data  technologies .
217 
97. Documents now in the public domain appear to detail (i) a police database containing 
hundreds of thousands of police files, many of which indicate widespread surveillance of the “ethnic language population”;
218 (ii) documents  that appear to be  of an official nature in the 
form of so -called “bulletins” from a police platform that serves to store data on individuals 
that can be flagged for potential detention, called the “ Integrated Joint Operations Platform ” 
(IJOP);219 and (iii) a police application used to communicate with the IJOP  system  
aggregating  diverse data about people it deems potentially threatening based on specific kind 
of behaviours and indicators .220  
  
 211 E.g., Article 2(2), I CESCR; UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General 
Comment No. 3, E/1991/23, para. 1; General Comment No. 16, E/C.12/2005/4, paras. 16, 32 and 40.  
 212 Article 27, ICCPR; Articles 3 and 15(1)(a), ICESCR; United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious  and Linguistic Minorities.  
 213 E.g., Articles 17 -67, CTL; Articles 16 -37, XIM ( after 2018 amendment ). 
 214 E.g., Articles 45, 50, CTL; Article 31, XIM ( after 2018 amendment) . 
 215 Article 150, CPL (and following).  
 216 Article 53, CTL.  
 217 See numerous documents that appear to be of an official nature, referring to the surveillance apparatus, such the “China Cables” and the Integrated Joint Operations Platform (IJOP) bulletins, 
released by the International Consortium of Investigative Journa lists (ICIJ) in November 2019; the 
“Xinjiang Papers”, New York Times: ‘Absolutely No Mercy’: Leaked Files Expose How China 
Organized Mass Detentions of Muslims , A. Ramzy and C. Buckley, 19 November 2019; “The 
Urumqi Police Database”, released by the Intercept, Y. Grauer, 29 January 2021; the “Xinjiang Police 
Files”, speech by Minister for Public Security Zhao Kezhi, 15 June 2018; see also Human Rights 
Watch, “China’s Algorithms of Repression”, 1 May 2019; Amnesty International, “Like we were enemies in a war”, 10 June 2021, p. 35- 36. 
 
218 The Intercept, “Revealed, Massive Chinese Database”, Y . Grauer, 29 January 2021.  
 219 International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, “China Cables | China’s Operating Manuals for Mass Internment”, 24 November 2019.  
 
220 Human Rights Watch, “China’s Algorithms of Repression”, 1 May 2019.  31 
 98. Taken together, these suggest key elements of a consistent pattern of invasive 
electronic surveillance that can be, and are, directed at the Uyghur and other predominantly 
Muslim populations , whereby certain behaviours, such as downloading of Islamic religious 
materials or communicating with people abroad, can be automatically monitored and flagged 
to law e nforcement as possible signs of “extremism” requiring police follow -up, including 
potential referral to a VETC  facility  or other detention facilitie s. Available materials also 
detail how police u tilise  community informants to collect information , as well a s how 
Chinese nationals who have acquired foreign citizenship and requested visas to return home 
can be closely monitored.221 
99. In addition to online surveillance, from at least 2016 onwards, XUAR also saw a 
significant expansion of physical checkpoints guarded by heavily armed police units on main 
roads, in villages and neighbourhoods, as well as other forms of monitoring of peopl e’s 
movement. A proliferation of so -called “convenience police stations” and security 
checkpoints throughout the region was described to OHCHR .222 In the words of one 
interviewee, “a road that would have taken 2.5 hours now took 9 hours”.223 Interviewees als o 
described that  permission from local authorities was apparently needed to leave one’s home 
and travel even to the next village.224 There are reports that such restrictions to free movement 
were applied in a targeted and discriminatory manner, whereby ethn ic community members  
were systematically checked at roadblocks and checkpoints, including at airports, while others could pass through so- called “green channels”.
225 Available information also strongly 
suggests that Government officials began confiscating passports of Uyghurs and other 
predominantly Muslim minorities around 2014,  and that this practice increased from the end 
of 2016 onwards.226 Some reported that when traveling from abroad to China, the mention in 
one’s passport of “Xinjiang” as their place of residence ( hukou) was enough to be singled out 
for specific questioning.227 
100. Furthermore , in 2014 the Government began the Fanghuiju programme, a three -year 
campaign  in XUAR  to “Visit the People, Benefit the People, and Get Together the Hearts of 
the People ”, by which it sent 200,000 cadres to regularly visit people in their homes  and 
undertake community level development .228 In 2016, the authorities then started the 
“Becoming Family” campaign, under which cadres and civil workers of all ethnic groups a re 
paired with each other through regular visits.  In December 2017, the programme was 
significantly expanded as authorities sent over 1 million cadres to spend a week living in 
mainly rural homes. In early 2018, this  “home stay” program me was again extende d, with 
cadres spending at least five days every two months in families’ homes. According to the Government, s ince 2016, under these “ethnic unity” campaigns, some 1.1 million officials 
have “paired up and made friends” with 1.6 million local people, “trea ting each other like 
family members” and “forged deep bonds through close interactions”.
229  
  
 221 The Intercept, “Revealed, Massive Chinese Database”, Y. Grauer, 29 January 2021.  
 222 OHCHR interviews. This is also referred to in the speech of Minister for Public Security, Zhao Zekhi, 
in which he refers to 7,629 convenience police stations in XUAR, see “Xinjiang Police Files”.  
 223 OHCHR interview.  
 224 OHCHR interviews.  
 225 OHCHR meeting note with media representative. See also Wall Street Journal, “Twelve days in 
Xinjiang: How China’s surveillance state overwhelms daily life”, Josh Chin, 19 December 2017.  
 226 This trend was also reported to OHCHR by a number of interviewees. The confiscation of passports 
was raised by the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in 2018. The 
Government responded noting that passports are issued according to the relevant provisions of 
China’s Passport Law and Exit and Entry Admi nistration Law, see CERD, Concluding Observations 
on the combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic reports of China (including Hong Kong, China 
and Macao, China), 19 September 2018, para. 40 (c) and 41 (f); and subsequent reply by Government 
of China, CE RD/C/CHN/FCO/14 -17, para. 4, 5 February 2020. Moreover, article 53(6) of the 2015 
Counterterrorism Law of China allows for confiscations of passports in the course of an investigation into suspected terrorist activities “based on the extent of the threat” (unofficial translation).  
 
227 OHCHR interviews.  
 228 See for example State-affiliated media “People” reporting: “ 访民情  惠民生 
聚民心”新疆20万机关干部下基 层住万村--新疆频道--人民网 (people.com.cn) . 
 229 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “What's False and What's True on 
China -related Human Rights Matters”, 2 July 2020.  32 101. Such  homestay programmes230 are presented by the Government as promoting social 
cohesion and community development . They appear to be involuntary in nature231 and have 
obvious and significant implications on the privacy of family life . For example, those with 
first-hand experience with such programmes explained how they were not allowed to pray or 
speak their own language when the “relatives” were visiting.232 The “Becoming Family ” 
programme has also had a clear gendered impact . Several women who experienced the 
programme233 spoke of sexual harassment and other forms of intrusive discomfort caused by 
visiting (male) cadres.  One interviewee whose husband was detained in a VETC facility 
while she was subject to the homestay programme recounted her experience as follows:  
“They ate with us. I prepared food for them. They were there all the time, even when I was 
doing homework with my kids. The children had to be educated against  their father, because 
they said he had ‘ bad ideas ’. There was surveillance all day long. ”234 
102. The laws, policies , programmes and practices described in this section pose several 
human rights concerns. Everyone has the right to protection against unla wful or arbitrary 
interference with privacy, family, home or correspondence ,235 with p rivacy encompassing 
information about one’s physical and social identity and private life , at all times, online and 
off-line. Any interference with this right must be lawful and not arbitrary , that is  necessary 
to achieve the protection of an essential interest of society, proportionate, and  accompanied 
by sufficient safeguards against abuse.236 The broad powers given to public officials in 
XUAR generally , with limited independent oversight and procedural safeguards against 
abuse , are already of considerable concern , and are exacerbated by the far -reaching and 
highly invasive methods of surveillance . The heightened  focus on Uyghurs and other 
predominantly Muslim minoritie s through the lens of “extremism”  is also likely to be 
discriminatory  in intent and/or effect . 
103. International human rights law also enshrines the right to freedom of movement, 
which includes  the right to liberty of movement and residence within a country’s borders as 
well at the right to leave a country, including one’s own.237 That right is only subject to 
restrictions that are provided by law and are strictly necessary for national security, public 
safety, or public order, and are consistent with other huma n rights. Such restrictions may not 
have a discriminatory intent or effect. The various policies and practices in XUAR, as described above, raise concerns in this regard . 
 C. Reproductive rights  
104. Further  allegations have been advanced with regard to violations of reproductive 
rights in XUAR.  These  allegations should be located in the context of broader human rights 
concerns with respect to sexual and reproductive rights in China. In its 2014 concluding observations, the UN Committee on Economic, Socia l and Cultural Rights, while welcoming 
the Government’s decision to revise the “one -child policy”, remained concerned that there 
continued to be restrictions on the opportunity for persons  to freely decide on the number of 
children they have. The Committee  noted information provided by the Government that the 
  
 230 See “Becoming family” handbooks made available by the University of British Columbia, Xinjiang 
Documentation Center (unofficial translations).  
 231 OHCHR interviewees with first -hand experience with the homestay programmes informed OHCHR 
that they could not refuse a “relative”.  
 232 OHCHR interviews.  
 233 OHCHR interviews.  
 234 OHCHR interviews.  
 235 Article 12, UDHR; Article 14, ICCPR.  
 236 See also report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, The right 
to privacy in the digital age , A/HRC/27/37 paras. 21 and 28 (“The State must ensure that any 
interference with the right to privacy, family, home or correspondence is authorized by laws that (a) 
are publicly accessible; (b) contain provisions that ensure that collection of, access to and use of 
communications data are tailored to specific legitimate aims; (c) are sufficiently precise, specifying in 
detail the precise circumstances in which any such interference may be permitted, the procedures for 
authorizing, the categories of persons  who may be placed under surveillance, the limits on the 
duration of surveillance, and procedures for the use and storage of the data collected; and (d) provide 
for effective safeguards against abuse.”).  
 237 Article 13, UDHR; Article 12, ICCPR.  33 
 Population and Family Planning Law prohibits the use of coercive measures to implement 
the birth quota but remained “seriously concerned about reported instances of the use of coercive measures, includ ing forced abortion and forced sterilization, with a view to limiting 
births”.
238 The UN Committee on the Elimination Discrimination against Women has also 
urged China  to consider removing sanctions on women who violate the family planning 
policy.239 
105. Prior to 2017, ethnic minorities such as the Uyghurs were allowed to have one more 
child than Han Chinese, meaning that urban Uyghur couples could have two children and 
rural Uyghur couples could have three children, while urban Han were allowed one child and rural Han were allowed two children  respectively . Overall, the Government reports that the 
population of XUAR grew from 12.98 million in the 2010 census to 14.93 million in the 2020 census, and that the Uyghur population grew from 10 million in the 2010 census to 11.6 million in the 2020 census, an annual average of 1.52 per cent.  
106. In 2017, XUAR amended its regional family planning policy to permit people of all 
ethnic groups to have two children in urban areas and three in rural, thus equalizing t he policy 
and allowing Han Chinese couples to have equal numbers of children as ethnic minorities.
240 
The amendments also enhanced enforcement, including through a threefold increase in the “social maintenance payment” payable by persons who violate the pol icy.
241 In June 2021, 
in line with the new national policy, XUAR introduced the three -child policy for all ethnic 
groups.   
107. Official population figures indicate a sharp decline in birth rates in XUAR f rom 
2017.242 Data from the  2020 Chinese Statistical Yearbook, covering 2019, shows that in the 
space of two years  the birth rate in Xinjiang dropped approximately 48.7 per cent,  from 15.88 
per thousand in 2017 to 8.14 per thousand in 2019. The average for all of China is 10.48 per thousand.
243 
 
  
 238 See UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding Observations on the second 
periodic report of China, including Hong Kong, China, and Macao, China, E/C.12/CHN/CO/2, 13 
June 2014, paras. 25-26. 
 239 See also Concluding Observations of the UN Commit tee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women, CEDAW/C/CHN/CO/7 -8, 14 November 2014, para.  39(b).  
 240 White Paper on “Xinjiang Population Dynamics and Data”, State Council Information Office, 
September 2021. See article 5 of the Regulations of Xinj iang Uyg hur Autonomous Region on 
Population and Family Planning, 28 July 2017.  This policy  change followed the national policy 
changes of 2015, allowing for two children per couple.  
 241 Article 42, Amendments to the regulations on family planning in Xinjiang ( See announcement of the 
Standing Committee of the 12 People’s Congress of Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region , 31 July 
2017.  
 242 These figures are to be located within the context of XUAR’s overall population growth of 18,5 per 
cent between 2010 an d 2020 period and the Government’s statistics indicating a 1,52 Uyghur 
population growth during that period. See CGTN, “Chart of the Day: Xinjiang’s population rises by 18,5 per cent from 2010 to 2020”, 15 June 2021. See also White Paper, “Xinjiang Populat ion 
Dynamics and Data”, State Council of Information, September 2021. Moreover,  the effects  of the 
“three-child  policy”  of 2021  remain  to be seen in XUAR  and particularly  as affecting  the reproductive  
rights  of Uyghur  and other  Muslim  ethnic  minorities,  see: CGTN,  “China releases decision on three-
child policy, supporting measures, 20 July 2021.  
 243 See the Chinese Statistical Year books at: http://www.stats.gov.cn/.  34  
 
The blue line represents % of births per 10,000 in XUAR. The red line represents % of 
births per 10,000 in the whole of China.244 
 
108. Uyghur -majority areas represented the bulk of this decline , with two of the largest 
Uyghur prefectures especially affected by it. In Ho tan, which is 96 per cent Uyghur,245 birth 
rates went from 20.94 per cent in 2016246 to 8.58 per cent per thousand births in 2018.247 
Similarly, the birth rate in Kashgar, which is approximately 92.6 per cent Uyghur,248 dropped 
from 18.19 per cent in 2016249 to 7.94 per cent per thousand births in 2018.250 Even taking 
into account the overall  decline in birth rates in China,251 these figures remain unusual  and 
stark . The same applies to the figures regarding sterilisations and IUD placements in XUAR, 
with official data indicating an unusually sharp rise in both forms of procedures in the region 
during 2017 and 2018, in comparison with the rest of China.252 For example, in 2018, 
sterilisations in XUAR stood at 243 per 100,000 inhabitants, whereas the overall figure f or 
China was a fraction thereof at only 32.1 per 100,000 inhabitants.253 
109. While the high birth rates among Uyghurs and other Muslim ethnic minorities prior 
to 2017 can partially be attributed to less strict implementation of family planning policies  
before that time ,254 a number of other factors credibly contribute to this significant and rapid 
drop in birth rates . The Government states that it conforms with broader global trends, as 
urbanization and modernization lower birth and death rates.  At the same time, various 
Government documents indicate that frequency in childbirth among the ethnic population in 
XUAR is associated with “extremism”, eliciting punitive responses under XUAR’s counter -
terrorism and counter -“extremism” framework . For exam ple, in its September 2021 W hite 
Paper on “ Xinjiang Population Dynamics and Data”, the Government makes a clear link 
between frequency in child births and religious “extremism”, noting that “ in the past, under 
the prolonged, pervasive and toxic influence of religious “extremism ”, the life of a large 
  
 244 See National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2011 -2020: http://www.stats.gov.cn/.  
 245 See 2016 Xinjiang Statistical Yearbook . 
 246 Xinjiang Government, 20 16 bulletin on national economic and social development statistics in the 
Hotan region  (unofficial translation) , 24 April 2014.  
 247 See 2018 and Hotan District National Economic and Social Development Statistics Bulletin, Hotan 
Regional Bureau of Statistics, 28 March  2019 . 
 248 See 2016 Xinjiang Statistical Yearbook.  
 249 See Kashgar region, 2016 National Economic Social Development  Statistics Bulletin.  
 250 See Kashgar region, 2018 National Economic Development Statistics Bulletin.  
 251 See World Bank, Birth rate, crude (per 1,000 people) - East Asia & Pacific, China | Data 
(worldbank.org) . 
 252 See China  Health  and Hygiene  Yearbooks  2018 and 2019. 
 253 See China  Health  and Hygiene Yearbooks  2019.  
 254 See, e.g., S tate media citing a 10.5% figure in relation to “unplanned pregnancies” in Kashgar  
prefecture between 1989 and 2014, China Daily, “An Analysis Report on Population Change  in 
Xinjiang ” 1 July 2017.  024681012141618
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 202035 
 number of people in Xinjiang and particularly in the southern part of the region was subject 
to severe interference, early marriage and childbearing, and frequent pregnancy and childbirth were commonplace among ethnic minorities”.
255 The XUAR Religious Affairs 
Regulations (XRAR) prohibit  “the use of religion to obstruct […] family planning”,256 and 
the XUAR Regulation on De -extremification  (XRD) of 2017 included “deliberately 
interfering with or undermining the implementation of family planning policies” as one of the 15 “primary expressions”  of religious extremism.
257 
110. This association between child -bearing, family planning and “extremism”  is further 
reflected in a number of official XUAR county- level regulations, which indicate that those 
found to be in violation of the family planning policy would be referred to “vocational skills education and training” and  that “long- term birth control me asures should be adopted”.
258 In 
addition, official documents in the public domain that are likely to be authentic , notably the 
“Karakax List”, have indicated that family planning violations were among the most common 
reasons for referral to a VETC  facility .  
111. Several women interviewed by OHCHR raised allegations of forced birth control, in 
particular forced IUD placements and possible forced sterilisations with respect to Uyghur and ethnic  Kazakh women. Some women spoke of the risk of harsh punishments including 
“internment” or “imprisonment” for violations of the family planning policy. Among these, OHCHR interviewed  some women  who said they were forced to have abortions or forced to 
have IUDs inserted, after having reached the permitted number of children u nder the family 
planning policy.
259 These first -hand accounts, although limited in number, are considered 
credible . 
112. The right to the highest attainable standard of health comprises sexual and 
reproductive freedom, which includes the right of individuals and couples “to decide freely and responsibly the number, spacing and timing of their children”.
260 Any restrictions of 
reproductive freedoms, for example in the context of population control policies imposed by States in the asserted wider inte rests of common welfare, must be in conformity with 
international law and standards: they must be proportional to the legitimate aim pursued and must never be discriminatory.
261 International standards further require that family planning 
policies should not be compulsory or based on coercion.262 
113. The available information, however, suggests that  coercive measures are likely to 
have accompanied  the strict enforcement of family planning policies post -2017, including in 
the context of the Government’s purported counter -terrorism and counter -“extremism” 
policies , and to have been a cause for the  significant decreases in the birth rates in Xinjiang  
generally , and especially in predominantly Uyghur -populated areas. Th e increase in IUD 
placements and sterilisation procedures during this period  also occurs  in the context of  
coercive family planning policies  enforced by strict measures, such as fines, referrals and 
threats of referral to VETC  or other detention facilities, in breach of the  reproductive r ights 
during the period 2017 -2019.  Although the policies in XUAR have appeared nominally 
  
 255 White Paper on “Xinjiang Population Dynamics and Data ”, 26 September 2021.  
 256 Article 5.3, XRAR (unofficial translation).  
 257 Article 9.14, XRD (unofficial translation).  
 258 See Notice on the issuance of the Implementation Plan for the Special Governance  of Illegal Births in 
the Quiemo County in 2018, article 17(2) ; see also article 31 of the Notice on the issuance of the 
Measures for the Administration of Two- Way Family Planning Services for the Mobile Population in 
Nillek County, November 2019. 
 259 OHCHR interviews.  
 260 International Conference on Population and Development Programme of Action, A/CONF.171/13, 
Principle 8 and Chapter VII, Section A on Reproductive Rights, para. 7.3; UN Committee on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, General Recommendation 19, paras. 22 and 24(m); 
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, para. 96.  
 261 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 19, para. 5.  
 262 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 19, para. 5; see also International Conference on Population and Development Programme of Action, A/CONF.171/13, Principle 8, Chapter VII, 
Section A on Reproductive Rights, para. 7.3, and Chapter VII, Section B on Family Planning, para. 
7.12.  36 consistent with the Government’s  broader approach to population planning,263 it appears they 
are linked to an expansive notion of religious “extremism”, raising further  concerns about 
discriminatory enforcement of these policies against Uyghur and other predominantly 
Muslim minorities.  
114. In summary, there are credible indications of violations of reproductive rights through 
the coercive enforcement of family planning  polic ies since 2017.  The lack of available 
Government data, including post -2019, makes it difficult to draw conclusions on the full 
extent of current enforcement of these policies and associated violations of reproductive rights.  
 D. Employment and labour issues  
115. On 20 April 2022, the National People’s Congress of China approved ratification of 
the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and the  Abolition of Forced Labour 
Convention, 1957 (No. 105). Previously China had already ratified other relevant ILO 
conventions including the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111) and the Employment Policy Convention, 1964 (No. 122), which provide for equality of opportunity and treatment without discrimination based on race and religion in 
employment and education, and for free choice of employment. The Government has undertaken a number of important labour law reforms, which should strengthen safeguards against forced labour. Article 96 of the Labour Law prohibits forced labour, and the Labour Contracts Law and Employment Promotion Law provide additional protections. Forced labour is penalised in Article 244 of the Criminal Law, and victims can also bring claims under the Civil Code. In 2013, China formally abolished i ts “re -education through labour” 
system, a form of administrative detention imposed by law enforcement authorities and has since rolled back custodial re -education schemes that existed for sex workers
264 and drug 
addicts throughout the country.265 China’s Ac tion Plan against Human trafficking (2021-
2030) also recognises trafficking for forced labour.266 
116. Employment  schemes have been an important component of China’s poverty 
alleviation programmes , including in Xinjiang . According to the Government’s  September 
2020 White Paper “Employment and Labour Rights in Xinjiang” , from 2014 to 2019, the 
total number of people employed in Xinjiang rose from 11.35 million to 13.3 million, an 
increase of 17.2 per cent. The White Paper also states that the average annual increase in 
urban employment was more than 471,200 people (148,000 in southern Xinjiang, accounting 
for 31.4 per  cent); and the average annual relocation of “ surplus rural labo ur” was more than 
2.76 million people, of whom nearly 1.68 million, or over 60 per  cent, were in southern 
  
 263 These policies have been documented by various UN human rights mechanisms, including the UN 
Working Group on the issue of discriminat ion against women in law and in practice, in its report on 
its mission to China of December 2013, in which it noted that the one -child policy, “although targeted 
at parents in general and not exclusively at mothers, has resulted in some serious violations of 
women’s reproductive health and physical integrity”. The Working Group stated that violence against women is “evident in the use of forced sterilization and abortion in furtherance of the one -child 
policy” and while “appreciating the recent condemnation  by the Government of such practices by 
local officials, strongly emphasizes that effective preventative measures need to be taken at the national level, to prevent any recurrence of such crimes”. See Report of the Working Group on the 
issue of discriminat ion against women in law and in practice, Mission to the P eople’s Republic of 
China, A/HRC/26/39/Add.2, para. 10 and 92, respectively.  In its 2014 concluding observations, the 
UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination a gainst Women expressed concern that “the 
illegal practices of forced abortions and sterilizations persisted in China”, despite “remarkable efforts by the State Party to curb” such practice, and that “women who violated family planning policy were subjected to fines, deprived of paid maternity leave, and experienced difficulty in registering their 
children.” See Concluding Observations of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women, CEDAW/C/CHN/CO/7 -8, para. 38.  
 
264 Decision to Repeal the Relevant Legal Provisions on and System of Custody and Education, Standing Committee of NPC, 28 December 2019.  
 
265 Narcotics Control Law 2007.  
 266 China’s Action  Plan against Human Trafficking (2021- 2030), General Office of the State Council, 9 
April 2021.  37 
 Xinjiang. The focus of these schemes has been on southern Xinjiang, which has lagged 
behind traditional indicators of development.   
117. The Government closely links its poverty alleviation schemes to the prevention and 
countering of religious “extremism”.  The White Paper alludes to  the perceived nexus 
between religious “extremism” and poverty in XUAR, noting that  in the four areas that 
constitute southern Xinj iang and that are identified as areas of extreme poverty , “terrorists, 
separatists and extremists  […] incite the public to resist learning the standard spoken and 
written Chinese language, reject modern science, and refuse to improve their vocational 
skills, economic conditions, and the ability to better their own lives”, and that, as a result, people have fallen into long- term poverty .  
118. It is against this backdrop that reports have emerged , since at least 2018 , of practices 
of forced or compulsory labour
267 with respect to Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim  
minorities in side and outside  XUAR.  These allegations relate to two  main contexts: (i) 
placements in VETC facilities and upon “graduation”; 268 (ii) labour pla cements in XUAR 
and in other parts of China, known as “surplus labour” and “labour transfer” schemes .269 
119. International standards emphasi ze strong linkages between skills development, 
employment  creation  and poverty alleviation programmes, 270 encouraging their use for the 
advancement of disadvantaged groups such as ethnic minorities, subject to the key conditions of voluntariness  and application on a non-discriminatory basis. Article 6 of the ICESCR 
provi des for the right to work, which includes the right of every human being to decide freely 
to accept or choose work and an obligation on the part of States to abolish, forbid and counter all forms of forced labour.
271 Article 8 of the ICCPR also prohibits forced labour, outside for 
present purposes of specific sentence to such punishment by a competent court, or work or service normally required of a person who is under detention (or during conditional release therefrom) in consequence of a lawful order of a court . ILO standards define f orced labour 
more specifically as “all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace 
of any penalty,” and for which the person has not offered themselves voluntarily.
272 The 
“menace of penalty ” can refer to criminal sanctions as well as various forms of coercion such 
as withholding identity and travel documents, threats , violence, imposing financial penalties, 
confinement, delaying or halting wage payments , or the loss of rights or other  privileges .273 
The various labour schemes need to be evaluated against these  standard s. 
120. With respect to the allegations of forced labour in the context of placements in VETC 
facilities, it should firstly be noted that the Government’s White Papers and other public statements show a clear link between VETC facilities and employment schemes. Fo r 
example, the 2019 White Paper on “Vocational Education and Training in Xinjiang” states 
  
 267 Hereafter “forced labour”.  
 268 See, e.g., Financial Times, “Forced labour being used in China’s “re -education camps”, E. Feng, 15 
December 2018.  
 269 See, e.g., BBC, “If the others go I'll go”: Inside China's scheme to transfer Uighurs into work, J. 
Sudworth, 2 March 2021. The article includes footage from a report from China’s state broadcaster 
illustrating how the policy works in practice.  
 270 While not ratifie d by China, see , e.g., ILO Human Resources Development Convention , 1975 (No. 
142) for the adoption and development of “comprehensive and co-o rdinated policies and programmes 
of vocational guidance and vocational training, closely linked with employment, in particular through public employment services” (article 1). Noting also, however, that “The policies and programmes 
shall encourage and enab le all persons, on an equal basis and without any discrimination whatsoever, 
to develop and use their capabilities for work in their own best interests and in accordance with their 
own aspirations, account being taken of the needs of society.”  
 
271 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 18 (“The Right to Work”), E/C.12/GC/18, 6 February 2006, para. 4.  
272 ILO Convention concerning Forced and Compulsory Labour, 1930 (no. 29), article 2(1).  
 273 See ILO, Combating forced labour – A handbook for employers and businesses , Geneva 2008, part 
IV, pp. 8 -9. See also Communication No. 1036/2001 Faure v. Australia, Views adopted by the UN 
Human Rights Committee on 31 October 2005, para. 7.5 (“ In the Committee’s view, the term “forced 
or compulsory labour” covers a range of conduct extending from, on the one hand, labour imposed on an individual by way of criminal sanction, notably in particularly coercive, exploitative or otherwise egregious conditions, through, on the other hand, to lesser forms of labour in circumstances where 
punishment as a comparable sanction is threatened if the labour directed is not performed.”).  38 that “many of the trainees who have completed their studies in education and training centers 
have gone on to find employment in factories or enterprises”.  Official s tatements refer to a 
“seamless connection” between the VETCs and employment.274 It also appears that 
companies in XUAR have been incentivised to hire ethnic minorities, 275 including former 
vocational education “trainees”. For example, an official “notice” f rom the Kashgar Public 
Information Office in 2018 stated that it had plans to transfer 100,000 individuals from vocational training to employment, while offering substantial subsidies to enterprises willing to hire “ students ”.
276  
121. The Government states that  such employment is based on voluntary labour contracts 
in accordance with the law.  However, the close link between the labour schemes and the 
counter -“extremism” framework, including the  VETC system , raises concerns in terms of the 
extent to which such programmes can be considered fully voluntary in such contexts . As 
explained above , the VETC system amounts to  large -scale arbitrary deprivation of liberty 
through involuntary placements in residential f acilities and compulsory “training”,. 
Individuals in the  system are , as a result, under a constant “ menace of penalty ”. For example, 
detainees in the VETC facilities told OHCHR they had to work within the VETC facilities 
as part of the “graduation process”, with no possibility of refusal for fear of being kept longer at the facilities.
277 Moreover, provisions in the XUAR Regulation on De -extremification, and 
other  laws, regulations and policies, impose deradicalization duties on enterprises and trade 
unions,  based on the law’s own expansive criteria of religious “extremism”.278 
122. With respect to the allegations of forced labour in XUAR that are not necessarily 
connected to VETC facilities, some publicly available information on “ surplus labour ” 
schemes suggests that various coercive methods may be used in securing “surplus 
labourers ”.279 The 13th Five-year Plan on Poverty Alleviation in the Xinjiang Uyghur 
Autonomous Region, adopted in May 2017, makes reference to “insufficient willingness of the poor people to gain employment  making it difficult to transfer employment and increase 
income ”.
280 Anot her official document indicates that “ surplus labourers ” are managed by a 
point system and that points are deducted if “any person is found to be reluctant to participate in the training despite having the conditions  to attend, not actively employed despit e being 
able to go out for employment, or having old- fashioned and stubborn ideas.” The same 
document contains an acknowledgement that “ surplus rural labour force ” “are unwilling to 
go out of their homes, to receive training and to be steadily employed”  and that management 
  
 274 See, e.g., Xinhua news, “t he Chairman of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region answered questions 
on the stability of anti -terrorism in Xinjiang and the development  of vocational skills education and 
training” 16 October 2018 (unofficial translation).  
 275 See, e.g., Tianshan, “Xinjiang: Head of enterprises absorbing ethnic minority labor to meet standards 
will be rewarded” (unofficial translation), 28 June 2014.  
 276 See Department of Public Information, Kashgar, Notice on the Issuance of the Implementation Plan 
for Employment Training for the Difficult Groups in Kashgar, 7 August 2018. It is unclear if this 
figure relates to VETCs directly, but the terminology used appears to include this target group.  
 277 OHCHR interviews.  
 278 See, e.g., the XUAR Regulation on De -extremification, as revised in October 2018, which lays down 
de-radicalization responsibilities for enterprises (article  46) and trade unions (article 34). Ente rprises 
failing to perform their de -radicalization duties are subject to “criticism and education” by the unit 
they are located at and may be subject to penalties (article 50, unofficial translation).  These duties 
serve in practice to sharply limit the ability of enterprises and trade unions from playing respective 
roles in promoting equality of opportunity and treatment in employment and occupation without discrimination. See conclusions by the ILO, Committee on the Application of Standards, 2 June 2022 , 
CAN/PV.5.  
 279 See, e.g., BBC, “‘If the others go I'll go’: Inside China's scheme to transfer Uighurs into work”, J. Sudworth, 2 March 2021. The article includes footage from a report from China's state broadcaster 
illustrating how the policy works in prac tice, which raises serious concerns about coercive methods.  
 280 See 13th Five-Year Poverty Alleviation Plan from June 2017.  The 14th Five-Year Poverty Alleviation 
Plan adopted in 2021, aims to consolidate and expand poverty alleviation programmes (unofficial translation).  39 
 of the system should “reward those who do a good job, and criticise and educate or even 
punish those who do a bad job .”281  
123. The focus of the schemes appear s particularly targeted  at rural labourers , to “transform 
them from farmers to indus trial workers” .282 These  tend to be  in poorer areas , which are also 
perceived as “backward” and at risk of religious “extremism”, such as southern and western Xinjiang . While such targeting may be focussed on poverty alleviation, absent the necessary 
voluntariness, it could also amount to a form of discrimination on religious and ethnic 
grounds, particularly in the broader context described in this assessment in which these schemes are implemented. D iscrimination on religious and  ethnic grounds can itself also be 
a contributory factor making people vulnerable to forced labour.
283 
124. In its annual report  issued on 9 February 2022, the ILO Committee of Experts on the 
Application of Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR) examined allega tions made by 
the International Trade Union Confederation in respect of the application of ILO Conventions 
No. 111 and 122 by China and responses from the Government.284 With respect to 
Convention No. 111, the Committee expressed its “deep concern in respec t of the policy 
directions expressed in numerous national and regional policy and regulatory documents” and “concern in respect of the methods applied, the impact of their stated objectives and their (direct or indirect) discriminatory effect on the employ ment opportunities and treatment of 
ethnic and religious minorities in China”.
285  
125. With  respect to Convention No. 122, the Committee observed that “the employment 
situation of Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities in China provides numerous indications of coercive measures many of which arise from regulatory and policy documents.”
286 The 
Commit tee noted various indicators suggesting measures severely restricting the free choice 
of employment: “These include government -led mobilization of rural households with local 
townships organizing transfers in accordance with labour export quotas; the reloc ation or 
transfer of workers under security escort; onsite management and retention of workers under strict surveillance; the threat of internment in vocational education and training centres if workers do not accept “government administration”; and the inability of placed workers to freely change employers.”
287 
126. Following up on the referral by C EACR of its comment in respect of Convention No. 
111, in June 2022  the International Labour Conference ’s Committee on the Application of 
Standards “deplored the use of all repressive measures against the Uyghur people, which has a discriminatory effect on their employment opportunities and treatment as a religious and ethnic minority in China, in addition to other violations of their fundamental rights.” The Committee urged the Government inter alia  to “immediately cease any discriminatory 
practices against the Uyghur population and any other ethnic minority groups, including internment or imprisonment on ethnic and religious grounds for deradicalization purposes”; and “amend national and regional regulatory provisions with a view to reorienting the 
mandate of vocational training and education centres from political re -education based on 
administrative detention.”
288 
  
 281 County Human Resources and Social Security Bureau, Implementation plan on the good service to 
transfer employment of surplus urban and rural labour in Chabchal County, 22 March 2018 
(unofficial translation).  
 282 County Human Resources and  Social Security Bureau, Implementation plan on the good service to 
transfer employment of surplus urban and rural labour in Chabchal County, 22 March 2018.  
 283 See ILO Indicators of Forced Labour -  Special Action Programme to Combat Forced Labour, 1 
Octobe r 2012.  
 284 Application of International Labour Standards 2022 Report III (Part A) Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations International Labour Conference 
110th Session, 2022.  
 
285 Ibid, p. 518 and 520.  
 286 Ibid, p. 688.  
 287 Ibid, p. 689.  
 288 Committee on Application of Standards, 110th International Labour Conference, 2 June 2022, 
CAN/China/PV.5.  40 127. OHCHR  shares , from the human rights perspective,  the concerns laid out by the ILO 
supervisory bodies. A lthough more information is needed on  the methods used in the 
recruitment, placement  and the conditions of work in the context of the VETC system, 
“surplus ” and labour transfer schemes, t he information availa ble and assessed by OHCHR in 
relation to these schemes in XUAR shows that there is an urgent  need for further clarification 
by the Government in line with China’s obligations under  international law and to provide 
follow -up to the ILO’s recommendations.  
128. In summary, there are indications that labour  and employment schemes, including 
those linked to the VETC system, appear to be discriminatory in nature or effect and to 
involve elements of coercion, requiring transparent clarification by the Government.  
 VII. Family separation and reprisals  
129. The implem entation of  the purported counter -terrorism and “extremism” policies in 
XUAR has also had deep impact s on families. The widespread arbitrary deprivation of liberty 
of Uyghurs and other predominantly Muslim communities in XUAR, often shrouded in 
secrecy, has led to many families being separated and unaware of the whereabouts of their loved ones. This has been particularly so for the diaspora community where there have  
additionally  been allegations of reprisals and intimidations against those seeking informat ion 
about their family members  or expressing concern publicly.   
 A. Family separations and enforced disappearances  
130. Claims  of family separations and enforced disappearances were among the first 
indicators of concern about the situation in XUAR, with large numbers of people alleged to be “forcibly disappeared” or “missing”.
289 Approximately two- thirds of the 15 2 outstanding 
cases on China of the UN Working Group on Enforced or  Involuntary Disappearances  pertain 
to XUAR over  the period 2017- 2022.290  
131. The Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances 
(CPED) defines such disappearance as “the arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of deprivation of liberty by agents of the State or by persons or groups of persons acting wi th 
the authorization, support or acquiescence of the State, followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation of liberty or by concealment of the fate or whereabouts of the disappeared person, which place such a person outside the protection of the law” .
291 Although China is 
not a party to the Convention on Enforced Disappearances, it is bound by the prohibition of 
enforced disappearance that is encompassed by other human rights treaties to which it is 
party, such as the Convention against Torture ,292 and to the extent the norm has crystallized 
in customary law . Moreover, the denial of the right to know the truth about the whereabouts 
of a victim of enforced disappearance can itself constitute a form of cruel and inhuman 
treatment for the immediate fam ily.293 
132. In some cases, when persons were taken to a VETC facility , family members are not 
informed about their whereabouts, the reasons for their “referral” to the centres, or the length 
  
 289 See introduction.  
 290 As at 31 May 2022.  
 291 The Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (CPED), article 2.  
 292 The UN Committee against Torture has addressed the issue of enforced disappearance in various 
concluding observations. See , e.g., UN Committee against Torture, Concluding Observations on 
Spain, 9 December 2009, CAT/C/ES P/CO/5, para. 21, in which the Committee stated that “acts of 
torture […] also include enforced disappearances”. See also Communication No. 456/2011, Larez vs. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 26 June 2015, para. 6.4 “The Committee further recalls that 
enforced disappearance entails multiple human rights violations and a failure by the State party 
concerned to comply with the obligations contained in the Convention, and that this constitutes in 
itself, in relation to the disappeared person, or may constitu te, in relation to the person’s relatives, a 
form of torture or inhuman treatment contrary to the Convention”.  
 
293 See, e.g., General Comment on the right to the truth in relation to enforced disappearance, as 
contained in the Report of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, 26 
January 2011, A/HRC/16/48, p. 15 (para. 4).  41 
 for which they may be retained. First -hand accounts suggest that infor ming family was not 
undertaken as a matter of policy, but rather on an ad hoc  basis following persistent attempts 
by family members to seek information about their whereabouts.294 While some interviewees 
seemed to know or suspect that family members had bee n taken to a VETC facility or another 
form of detention, most remained unsure of the situation and, despite attempts at clarifying 
the whereabouts with the authorities, their fate remained unknown. This lack of knowledge and any contact has been particular ly painful for families living at geographical  distance 
abroad and requires immediate clarification by the authorities. In the same vein, former detainees said they had no contact with family during their time at VETC facilities, and that they did not know  if their families knew where they were.
295 Without it being clear as to the 
variation in approach, some detainees were allowed to have occasional family visits or phone calls under supervision and surveillance.
296 
133. The Xinjiang Victims Database, a platform u sed by exiled family members seeking 
the whereabouts of their loved ones in XUAR, currently has hundreds of entries of alleged “missing persons”.
297 OHCHR  has reviewed dozens of interviews of family members who 
have posted on the Xinjiang Victims Database a nd other sites in the hope of locating their 
loved ones. It has also reviewed audio recordings taken by family members who have attempted to contact local authorities in XUAR to seek clarification. It has further reviewed available Government  responses to some of these cases, which consistently assert that those 
allegedly missing are “living normal lives” in XUAR, often  without  any further supporting 
information.   
134. For example, o n 9 April 2021, in a press conference in Beijing , authorities 
acknowledged that out of 12,050 people in the Xinjiang Victims Database, they had confirmed the existence of 10,708 people . 1,342 accounts reportedly pertained to individuals 
who were “ fabricated .” Out of the 10,708 people,  6,962 were “living  a normal li fe”; 3,244 
had reportedly been convicted and sentenced for  terrorist acts and other criminal offences ; 
238 ha d reportedly died of “diseases and other causes” and 264 were  living overseas.
298 The 
authorities did not release the names of those individuals, or the court decisions upon which 
those serving prison terms have been convicted, prolonging the uncertainty for families.  
135. Family separations result from a number of factors and not all necessarily amount to 
enforced or involuntary disappearances . Issues of f amily separations  also arise between 
families whose members are split between XUAR and abroad. The risk of reprisals against 
family members in XUAR on account of contact from abroad is an important reason, 
repeatedly raised in interviews with OHCHR, why contacts are often severed by families 
themselves. OHCHR has also had accounts of Uyghur parents living abroad, who continue to be unable to contact their children left behind with relatives in XUAR.
299 As noted, contact 
with persons abroad is one of the reasons for referral to a VETC facility. In one instance, an individual described having lost contact with his wife and children, as well as more than 30 other relatives in XUAR, all of whom he said had either changed their phone numbers or simply refused to accept his phone calls, due to fear of reprisals.
300 In the words of another 
  
 294 OHCHR interviews. See also, the “Xinjiang papers”, which include a classified directive that instructs 
authorities with a script how to handle questions about detained family members from students who 
return home at the end of the academic semester. This guide instructed officials to tell students that 
their relatives are in “a training school set up by the government,” which they cannot leave.  
 295 OHCHR interviews.  
 296 OHCHR interviews.  
 297 It is difficult to quantify the exact number of “missing persons” from the Xinjiang Victims Database (https://shahit.biz/eng/), as the information may not be fully up to date. Since 2017/2018 there have 
been over 1,700 individuals who have reported cases, including of missing relatives or friends.  
 
298 The seventh press conference by Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region on Xinjiang-related issues in 
Beijing, 9 April 2021. See a transcript on the website of the Chinese Embassy in the United States: 
https://www.mfa.gov.cn/ce/ceus//eng/zt/wonderfulxj/xinjiangpressconference/7thpress/t1894724.htm.  
 299 See also , e.g., Amnesty International “Hearts and Lives Broken: The nightmare of Uyghur families 
separated by repression”, 19 March 2021.  
 300 OHCHR interview.  42 interviewee: “I haven’t talked to my family because I was told not to contact them or else 
they would be sent to re -educatio n.”301 
 B. Intimidations, threats and reprisals  
136. The Chinese authorities continue to openly criticise victims and their relatives now 
living abroad  for speaking about their experience s in XUAR , discrediting stories that are 
made public .302  
137. Intimidations  and threats were also reported by former detainees, some of whom were 
forced to sign a document ahead of their release, pledging not to speak about their experience in the VETCs.
303 In the words of one interviewee:  “We had to sign a document t o remain 
silent about the camp. Otherwise, we would be kept for longer and there would be punishment for the whole family.”
304 
138. Patterns of intimidations, threats and reprisals were consistently highlighted by 
interviewees. Two -thirds of the interviewees with whom OHCHR spoke asserted having 
been victims of some form of intimidation or reprisal, in particular threatening phone calls or messages, mostly by Chinese , but also from neighbouring States , to fellow exiled Uyghurs 
or Kazakhs , or by family members, possibly acting at the behest of the authorities, following 
statements  or advocacy in relation to XUAR. Some also claimed that family members in 
XUAR had been intimidated or suffered direct reprisals as a result of public engagement overseas, including being taken to a VETC or other facility.  
139. Over the past few years, credible information has been received about members of the 
Uyghur community living abroad in several countries, having been forcibly returned, or being placed at risk of forcible return to China, in breach of the prohibit ion under 
international law of refoulement . The UN human rights mechanisms, including the UN 
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination as well as the Special Procedures, have expressed concerns about reports of forcible return of Uyghurs to China, and have recalled the human rights and refugee law obligations of both China and third countries in such circumstances.
305 In this context, OHCHR is also aware of dozens of Uyghurs living in 
third countries whose passpor ts have expired and who have experienced  difficulties in 
renewing their documents, including due to fear of reprisals, or fear of being forcibly returned to China.  
140. Moreover, there are claimed threats of reprisals against staff employed by, or 
conducting ac tivities on behalf of, foreign enterprises with links to XUAR through their value 
chains , while attempting to conduct due diligence and requesting transparency in line with 
the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.  
141. These  patterns of intimidations, threats and reprisals are generally credible and are 
likely to have caused, and continue to cause,  a serious chilling effect on the se communit ies’ 
right s to freedom of expression, privacy, physical integrity and family life, and in 
conseq uence inhibit the flow of information on the situation inside  XUAR.  
142. In conclusion, t he patterns  of family separations among Uyghur s and members of 
other predominantly Muslim minorities, which in some cases may amount to enforced 
disappearances, are a direct consequence of the means by which the detention programme has been operated  and are therefore likely to have impacts on similar  scales . They  have been 
  
 301 OHCHR interview.  
 302 See, e.g., Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Foreign Ministry 
Spokesperson Wang Wenbin's  Regular Press Conference on 23 February 2021: 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/202102/t20210224_
9721163.html.  
 303 OHCHR interviews.  
 304 OHCHR interview.  
 305 See, e.g., UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimina tion, Concluding Observations on 
the combined fourteenth to seventeenth periodic reports of China (including Hong Kong, China and Macao, China), CERD/C/CHN/CO/14 -17, para. 40(d) and 42(g), 19 September 2018.  see also: 
https://news.un.org/en/story/2009/12/325022-forcible -return -uighurs -cambodia-sparks -un-experts -
concern . 43 
 exacerbated by a pattern of intimidations  and threats of reprisals against victims  and their 
relatives  inside and outside XUAR. The onus remains on the Government to urgently clarify 
the fate and whereabouts of missing family members and to facilitate safe contacts and 
reunification. At the same time, and in light of the overall assessment of the human rights situation in X UAR, countries hosting Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities from XUAR 
should refrain from forcibly returning them, in any circumstance of real risks of breach of the principl e of non- refoulement.  
VIII.   Overall assessment and recommendations   
143. Serious human rights violations have been committed in XUAR in the context of the 
Government’s application of counter -terrorism and counter -“extremism” strategies.  The 
implementation of th ese strategies, and associated policies in XUAR has led to interlocking 
patterns of severe and undue restrictions on a wide range of human rights. These patterns of 
restrictions are characterized by a discriminatory component, as the underlying acts often 
directly or indirectly affect Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim communities .   
144. These human rights violations, as documented in this assessment, flow from a 
domestic “anti -terrorism law system” that is deeply problematic from the perspective of 
international human rights norms and standards. It contains vague, broad and open- ended 
concepts that leave wide discretion to officials to interpret and apply broad investigative, 
preventive and coercive powers, in a context of limited safeguards and scant indepe ndent 
oversight. This framework, which is vulnerable to discriminatory application, has in practice 
led to the large -scale arbitrary deprivation of liberty of members of Uyghur and other 
predominantly Muslim communities in XUAR in so- called VETC and other facilities, at least 
between 2017 and 2019. Even if the VETC system has since been reduced in scope or wound up, as the Government has claimed, the laws and policies that underpin it remain in place .  
There appears to be a parallel trend of an increased number and length of imprisonments 
occurring through criminal justice processes, suggesting that the focus of deprivation of liberty has shifted  towards imprisonment, on purported grounds of counter -terro rism and 
counter -“extremism”.  
145. The treatment of persons held in the system of so- called VETC facilities is of equal 
concern. Allegations of patterns of torture or ill -treatment, including forced medical 
treatment and adverse conditions of detention, are cr edible, as are allegations of individual 
incidents of sexual and gender -based violence. While the available information at this stage 
does not allow OHCHR to draw firm conclusions regarding the exact extent of such abuses, it is clear that the highly secur itised and discriminatory nature of the VETC  facilitie s, coupled 
with limited access to effective remedies or oversight by the authorities, provide fertile ground for such violations to take place on a broad scale.  
146. The system s of arbitrary detention and r elated patterns of abuse in VETC and other 
detention facilities come against the backdrop of broader discrimination against members of Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim minorities based on perceived security threats 
emanating from individual members of  these groups.  This has included far -reaching, 
arbitrary and discriminatory restrictions on human rights and fundamental freedoms , in 
violation of international norms and standards. These have included undue restrictions on 
religious identity and expression, as well as the rights to privacy and movement. There are serious indications of violations of reproductive rights through the coercive and discriminatory enforcement of family planning and birth control policies. Similarly, there are indications that la bour and employment schemes for purported purposes of poverty 
alleviation and prevention of “extremism”, including those linked to the VETC system, may involve elements of coercion and discrimination on religious and ethnic grounds.  
147. The described policies and practices in XUAR have transcended borders, separating 
families and severing human contacts, while causing particular suffering to affected Uyghur, Kazakh and other predominantly Muslim minority families, exacerbated by patterns of intimidations and th reats against members of the diaspora community speaking publicly 
about experiences in XUAR.  44 148. The information currently available to OHCHR on implementation of the 
Government’s stated drive against terrorism and “extremism” in XUAR in the period 2017-
2019 a nd potentially thereafter, also raises concerns from the perspective of international 
criminal law. The extent of arbitrary and discriminatory detention of members of Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim groups, pursuant to law and policy, in context of r estrictions 
and deprivation more generally of fundamental rights enjoyed individually and collectively, may constitute international crimes, in particular crimes against humanity.  
149. The Government holds the primary duty to ensure that all laws and policies are 
brought into compliance with international human rights law and to promptly investigate any allegations of human rights violations, to ensure accountability for perpetrators and to provide redress to victims. Individuals who are arbitrarily deprived of  their liberty should be 
immediately released. As the conditions remain in place for serious violations to continue and recur, these must also be addressed promptly and effectively. The human rights situation in XUAR also requires urgent attention by the G overnment, the United Nations 
intergovernmental bodies and human rights system, as well as the international community 
more broadly.  
150. OHCHR is grateful to the Government and other institutions for sharing with it 
information about aspects of the situation i n XUAR. This assessment was also facilitated by 
the vast amount of research that has been completed by non- governmental organizations, 
researchers, journalists and academics over the last years (and independently assessed by 
OHCHR). OHCHR is deeply gratefu l to the victims and witnesses who were willing to share 
their experiences with OHCHR, despite the potential risks to themselves and their loved ones.  
  Recommendations  
151. OHCHR recommends to the Government of China that it:   
(i) Takes prompt steps to release all individuals arbitrarily deprived of their liberty 
in XUAR, whether in VETCs, prisons or other detention facilities;  
(ii) Urgently clarifies the whereabouts of individuals whose families have been 
seeking information about their  loved ones in XUAR, including by providing details of their 
exact locations and establishing safe channels of communication and travel enabling families 
to reunite;  
(iii) Undertakes a full review of the legal framework governing national security, 
counter -terro rism and minority rights in XUAR to ensure their compliance with binding 
international human rights law, and urgently repeal all discriminatory laws, policies and 
practices against Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim minorities in XUAR, in particular those that have led to the serious human rights violations as detailed in this assessment;  
(iv) Promptly investigates allegations of human rights violations in VETCs and 
other detention facilities, including allegations of torture, sexual violence, ill- treatment, 
forced medical treatment, as well as forced labour and reports of deaths in custody;  
(v) Implements , as a matter of priority , the Concluding Observations from the UN 
Committee against Torture and the UN Committee  on the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, in cluding establishment of an independent oversight mechanism to ensure 
prompt, impartial and effective investigation into all allegations of torture and ill- treatment;  
(vi) Ensures that surveillance both on and offline comply with strict tests of 
legality, nece ssity and proportionality, including for matters of national security, and does 
not infringe on fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals;  
(vii) Cooperates with the ILO and social partners in the implementation of the 
recommendations made by the ILO Committ ee of Experts on Conventions No. 111 and 122, 
including by allowing a technical advisory mission, and in the implementation of Conventions No. 29 and 105 on forced labour, and the 2014 Protocol;
306 
  
 306 Committee on Application of Standards, 110th International Labour Conference, 2 June 2022, 
CAN/China/PV.5.  45 
 (viii) Provides adequate remedy and reparation to victims of human rights 
violations; 
(ix) Clarifies the reports of destruction of mosques, shrines and cemeteries by 
providing data and information and suspend all such activities in the meantime;  
(x) Ceases immediately all intimidation and reprisals against Uyghur and other 
predominantly Muslim minorities abroad in connection with their advocacy, and their family 
members in XUAR; and ensure that all citizens including of Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim minorities can hold a valid passport and travel to and from China without  fear of 
reprisals;  
(xi) Ratifies the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the 
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; 
and the Optional Protocols to the Convention against Torture, to the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;  
(xii) Invites as a matter of priority the Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary 
Disappearances, the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Special Rapporteur on Torture, the Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Minorities, the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion and Belief, the Special Rapporteur on Cultural Rights and the Working Group on Business and Human Rights to conduct unrestricted country visits to China, including to XUAR; and 
(xiii) Continues engagement with OHCHR to enable further assessment of the 
situation; and facilitates further visits by OHCHR and technical exchanges on human rights issues in XUAR,  in follow up to the High Commissioner’s visit.  
  OHCHR remains available to support and advise in the implementation of these 
recommendations.  
152. OHCHR recommends to the business community that it:  
(i) Takes all possible measures to meet the responsibility to respect human rights 
across activities and business relationships as set out the UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights, including through enhanced human rights due diligence, and report on this transparently; and  
(ii) Strengthens human rights risk assessment by companies involved in the 
surveillance and security sector, including whether products and services could lead to or contribute to adverse human rights impacts, including on the rights to privacy, freedom of movement, and the respect of non -discrimination.  
153. OHCHR recommends to the international community that it  supports efforts to 
strengthen the protection and promotion of human rights in the XUAR region in follow -up 
to these recommendations. States should further r efrain from returning members of Uyghur 
and other predominantly Muslim minorities to China who are at risk of refoulement  and 
provide humanitarian assistance, including medical and psycho- social support , to victims in 
the States in which they are located.  
     
  46 Appendix  
 
Note Verbale of the Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations in 
Geneva, dated 31 August 2022, and annex  
 Available at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/documents/country -reports/ohchr -assessment -human -rights -concerns -xinjiang -
uyghur -autonomous -region  
* Redactions applied by OHCHR further to policy to protect individual rights and interests  as required . 