 
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
Updated September 22, 2023
China Primer: Uyghurs
Uyghurs ( also spelled “Uighurs”) are a Muslim  ethnic 
minority group living primarily in the Xinjiang Uyghur 
Autonomous Region (XUAR) in the far northwest of the 
People’s Republic of China  (PRC  or China ). They have 
garner ed the attention of U.S. policy makers , particularly 
since 2018 following reports of the mass internment of 
Uyghurs in “reeducation ” centers . The facilities were  part 
of an ongoing  government effort  to systematically 
transform th e thought and behavior of Uyghurs and 
forcefully assimilate them into PRC  society , which some 
observers say is destroying Uyghur  culture and identity . 
The U.S. government  has responded by implementing 
targeted restrictions on trade with Xinjiang and imposi ng 
visa and economic sanctions on some PRC officials .  
Uyghurs speak a Turkic language and practice a moderate 
form of Sunni Islam.  The XUAR , often referred to simply 
as Xinjiang (pronounced “SHIN -jyahng”), is a provincial -
level administrative region that comprises  about one -sixth 
of China’s  total land area and borders eight  countries. The 
region  is rich in minerals , produces over 80% of China’s 
cotton, and has China’s largest coal and natural gas reserves 
and a fifth of its oil reserves.  PRC officials  refer to Xinjiang  
as a “core hub”  for China’s  Belt and Road Initiative , which  
involves  Chinese -backed infrastructure projects and energy 
development in neighboring Central and South Asia .  
 
Source s: CRS, using U.S. Department of State Boundaries; Esri; 
Global Administrative Areas ; DeLorme ; NGA.  
All or parts of the area comprising Xinjiang have been 
under the political control or influence of Chinese, 
Mongols , and Russians for long spans  of the region’s 
documented history, along with per iods of Turkic or 
Uyghur rule. Uyghurs played a role in the establishment of 
two short -lived , semi -autonomous  East Turkestan 
Republics in the 1930s and 1940s. The PRC asserted 
control over Xinjiang in 1949 and established the XUAR in 
1955. Uyghurs once wer e the predominant ethnic group in 
Xinjiang ; they now make up  less than  half of the region’s 
population of 26 million, according to official sources . The 
government long has provided economic incentives for Han 
Chinese, the majority ethnic group in China,  to migrate to the region ; Hans  now constitute 42% of the XUAR 
population  and the majority in Urumqi, the regional capital . 
Since 2017, the Xinjiang  government has carried out a 
campaign to forcefully reduce birth rates or “illegal births” 
among Uygh urs and other minority groups .  
Since an outbreak of Uyghur demonstrations and 
interethnic unrest in 2009 , and sporadic  clashes involving 
Uyghurs and Xinjiang security personnel that spiked 
between 2013 and 2015, PRC leaders have carried out large 
scale cr iminal arrests and  intensive security measures  in the 
XUAR, aimed at combatting “terrorism, separatism , and 
religious extremism. ” Three violent incidents in China in 
2014 purportedly carried out by  Uyghurs  against Han 
civilians were described by some outside observers as acts 
of terrorism .  
Forced Assimilation  
Since 2017, in  tandem with a national polic y referred to as 
“Sinicization ,” XUAR authorities have instituted measures 
to assimilate Uyghurs  into Han Chinese society and reduce 
the influences of Uyghur, Islamic, and Arabic cultures and 
languages. Some experts contend  the PRC government has 
used counterterrorism as a pretext for carrying out 
assimilation policies  and mass detentions in Xinjiang . The 
XUAR government enacted a law in 2017 that prohibits 
“expressions of extremification ,” and placed restrictions  
upon dress and grooming, traditional Uyghur customs , and 
adherence to Islamic dietary laws ( halal). Thousands of 
mosques in Xinjiang have be en closed, demolished , or 
“Siniciz ed,” whereby Islamic motifs and Arabic writings 
have been removed . The Xinjiang government has placed 
nearly half a million Uyghur and other minority children in 
state-run boarding schools, and has banned the use of 
Uyghur language in instruction in all schools  in the XUAR .  
Mass Internment  
Between 2017 and 2019, XUAR authorities , at the behest of 
Chinese Communist Party  General Secretary Xi Jinping,  
arbitrarily detained over 1 million ethnic Uyghur and other 
Muslims in reeducation centers. Detainees generally were 
not accused of crimes, but rather were held on the basis of 
past religious, cultural, scholarly, social, and online 
activities, as well as foreign travel, that the government 
later deemed “extremist ,” “pre -criminal ,” or potentially 
terrorist.  Detainees were  compelled to renounce many of 
their Islamic beliefs and customs as a condition for their 
release. Treatment in the centers reportedly included food 
deprivation, psychological pressure, sexual abuse, medica l 
neglect, torture, and forced labor. Leaked Xinjiang police 
files, which included thousands of detainee records and 
images, important party directives, and police protocols, 
revealed the prison -like nature of the reeducation centers.  
China Primer: Uyghurs  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  Since 2019, the XUAR government appears to have 
released some detainees, prosecuted many as criminals, and 
sent others to  work as  factory labor. Many forms of 
political indoctrination continue in homes  and factories.  
Some reeducation centers appear to have  been converted to 
high-security prisons and new prisons have been built. In 
2022, the XUAR government reported it had prosecuted 
540,826 people  since 2017 ; human rights groups presume 
many were  Uyghurs charged with political crimes . More 
than 300 Uyghur i ntellectuals and cultural figures are 
believed to be detained or serving prison sentences. Among 
Uyghur intellectuals handed long sentences for state 
security crimes are Ilham Tohti (convicted in 2014), a n 
economics professor who had maintained a website r elated 
to Uyghur issues, and Rahile Dawut, a scholar of Uyghur 
folklore who was convicted  in September 2023 . Both were 
found guilty of “separatism” and sentenced to life in prison.  
In August 2022, the United Nations Office of the High 
Commissioner for Hum an Rights determined that China ’s 
counterterrorism and counter -“extremism ” strategies have 
led to “interlocking patterns of severe and undue 
restrictions on a wide range of human rights ” and may 
constitute crimes against humanity. It called on China to 
“release all individuals arbitrarily deprived of their liberty ” 
and “urgently repeal ” all discriminatory laws and policies 
against Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities in the XUAR.  
Forced Labor  
The PRC  government has pressured  many  Uyghurs, 
including former detainees, into accepting employment in 
textile, apparel, agricultural, consumer electronics , and 
other labor -intensive industries , in Xinjiang and other 
provinces . Some f actories  utilizing Uyghur labor are tied to 
global supply chains.  Uyghurs who r efuse to accept such 
employment may face detention  or other penalties .  
Selected U.S. Responses  
Atrocities Determination.  On January 19, 2021, the State 
Department announced that it had determined that the PRC 
had committed crimes against humanity and genocide in 
Xinjiang, and called on multilateral and juridical bodies to 
pursue accountability. The Biden Administration has 
concurred with this determination . The State Department’s  
annual human rights report on China covering 2022  
describes these crimes as “continuing.”  
 
Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act . On June 17, 2020, 
then-President Trump signed the Uyghur Human Rights 
Polic y Act of 2020 ( P.L. 116 -145) into law. The act  aims to 
impose sanctions on PRC officials determined to be 
responsible for human rights abuses against Uyghurs and 
other Musl im minority groups in Xinjiang. The act  also 
mandate d a number of  reports from  the executive branch  on 
subjects including the extent of human rights violations and 
abuses in Xinjiang, the implications for U.S. security and 
economic interests, and U.S. efforts to protect Uyghur -
Americans and ethnic Uyghurs from China residing  in the 
United States from har assment or intimidation by officials 
or agents of the PRC government.   
Targeted Sanctions  and Investment Restrictions . The 
United States has to date  publicly designated 10 current or former PRC officials  for sanctions  in relation to human 
rights abuses in Xinjiang  pursuant to Executive Order 
13818 , which  implements the Global Magnitsky Human 
Rights Accountability Act (Title XII, Subtitle F of P.L. 114 -
328). Among those desig nated is former XUAR  Party 
Secretary Chen Quanguo . Also designated are  two entities,  
the Xinjiang Public Security Bureau and the Xinjiang 
Production and Construction Corps, a state-run paramilitary 
organization with major economic interests in the XUAR. 
The State Department  also has announced  visa restrictions 
against Xinjiang officials and  their immediate family 
members pursuant to other authorities . Separately, the 
Treasury Department  has imposed  restrictions on U.S. 
investments in certain PRC  companies involved in the 
surveillance and tracking of religious and ethnic minorities 
in China.  
Export Controls. Since October 2019, the  Commerce 
Department  has added approximately  70 companies and 
public security entities to the Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS) “entity list” under the Export Administration 
Regulations (EAR) due to their connection to human rights 
abuses or repression in Xinjiang. A number of other PRC 
entities hav e also been added, due in whole or in part, to 
their connection to human rights abuses in China. The 
actions impose licensing requirements prior to the sale or 
transfer of certain U.S. items to these entities, with a 
presumption of license denial for most items.  
Forced Labor Import Restrictions. From 2019 to 2021,  
U.S. Customs and Border Protection  (CBP) issued a series 
of announcements blocking the import of goods suspected 
of involving Xinjiang -related forced labor  pursuant to the 
forced labor import ban under Section 307 of the Tariff Act 
of 1930 . In December 2021, Congress passed and President 
Biden signed into law  P.L. 117 -78, popu larly referred to as  
the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act (UFLPA ). Among 
other provisions, the law creates a  presumption that goods 
produced or manufactured in Xinjiang, or by entities with 
certain ties to Xinjiang, are made with forced labor, unless 
CBP affirmatively determines otherwise. Pursuant to the 
UFLPA, this “rebuttable presumption”  went into effect on 
June 21, 2022.  
East Turkestan Islamic Movement  
The PRC government  has attributed some past deadly 
incidents in the XUAR  since the 1990s  to the Eas t 
Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) , which it portrays as 
a Uyghur separatist and terrorist group with ties to global 
terrorist organizations. The U.S. government designated 
ETIM as a terrorist organization under Executive Order 
13224  in 2002 (to block terrorist financing) and in 2004  
placed ETIM on the Terrorist Exclusion List  (TEL ). Since 
2017, the U.S government has noted  a lack of credible 
evidence  supporting ETIM’s continued presence , and stated 
in 2022 that it “has not seen clear and convincing evidence 
of ETIM ’s existence .” In 2020, t he Trump Administration 
removed ETIM from the TEL. United Nations san ctions 
monitors differ in their assessment, reporting that  in 2022,  
ETIM had a prese nce in Afghanistan and Syria.  
Thomas Lum , Specialist in Asian Affairs    
Michael A. Weber , Analyst in Foreign Affairs   China Primer: Uyghurs  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF10281  · VERSION 47 · UPDATED   IF10281
 
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 